---
tags:
  - arbitrage
  - bond_dealer
  - relative_value
  - riskless_profit
  - swaption
aliases:
  - Arbitrage Definition
  - Pure Arbitrage
  - Relative Value
key_concepts:
  - Law of one price
  - Pure vs. Relative Value
  - Relative value arbitrage
  - Riskless instantaneous profit
  - Static and dynamic arbitrage
---

# 1.4 ARBITRAGE: PURE VERSUS RELATIVE VALUE  

We introduce the notion of relative value [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) which drives the trading behavior of [financial firms](../../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Introduction.md) irrespective of the market in which they operate. Relative [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) takes the concept of [pure arbitrage](.md) beyond its technical definition of riskless profit. All [primary market](Primary%20Issuance%20and%20Secondary%20Resale%20Markets.md) risks are eliminated, but some [secondary market](Primary%20Issuance%20and%20Secondary%20Resale%20Markets.md) exposures are deliberately left unhedged..  

[Arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) is defined in most textbooks as [riskless instantaneous profit](.md). It occurs when the [law of one price](../../../../Pricing%20Forwards,%20Futures,%20Bonds,%20Swaps,%20Swaptions,%20Caps%20and%20Floors%20under%20No-Arbitrage%20and%20Risk-Neutral%20Pricing.md) - which states that the same item cannot sell at two different prices at the same time - is violated. The same stock cannot trade for one price at one exchange and for a different price at another unless fees, taxes, etc., are involved, but, if it does, traders will buy it on the exchange where it sells for less and sell it on the exchange where it sells for more. Buying Czech korunas with British pounds cannot be more expensive than buying dollars with pounds and using dollars to buy korunas. If one can get more korunas for pounds by buying dollars first, no one will buy korunas for pounds directly. Anyone with access to both markets will buy korunas through dollars and immediately sell them for pounds to realize an instantaneous and riskless profit. This is a very simple example of [pure arbitrage](.md) in the spot [currency](../../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) markets. [Pure arbitrage](.md) can take a static form, where the trade is put on at the outset and liquidated once at a future date - e.g. trading [Forward Rate Agreements](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%2012/EURIBOR%20Forward%20Rate%20Agreements%20and%20Futures.md) against spot LIBORs for two different terms (see Chapter 3) - or a dynamic form, in which the trader commits to a series of steps that guarantee the elimination of all directional market risks and ensure riskless profit upon completion of these steps (see Chapters 4 to 7). A bond dealer may purchase a callable bond from the issuer, buy a swaption from a third party to offset the call risk, and delta-hedge the rate risk by [shorting](../Chapter%202%20-%20Spot%20Markets/Short%20Selling.md) some bullet swaps. He guarantees a riskless profit provided that neither the issuer nor the swaption seller defaults. Later chapters abound. in detailed examples of both [static and dynamic arbitrage](.md).  

Definition [Pure arbitrage](.md) is defined as generating riskless profit today by statically or dynamically matching current and future obligations to exactly offset each other, inclusive of incurring known financing costs.  

Opportunities for [pure arbitrage](.md) in today's ultra-sophisticated markets are limited. The money-making activities of most institutions rely on the principle of relative value [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md). [Hedge funds](../../../../Financial%20Engineering/Basis%20Trade%20Explainer.md) and proprietary trading desks of large [financial firms](../../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Introduction.md) employ relative [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) techniques. Relative value [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) consists of a broadly defined hedge in which a close substitute for a particular risk dimension of the primary security is found, and the [law of one price](../../../../Pricing%20Forwards,%20Futures,%20Bonds,%20Swaps,%20Swaptions,%20Caps%20and%20Floors%20under%20No-Arbitrage%20and%20Risk-Neutral%20Pricing.md) is applied as if the substitute was a perfect match. Typically, the position in the substitute is opposite to that in the primary security in order to offset the most significant or unwanted risk inherent in the primary security. Other risks are purposely left unhedged: if the substitute is well chosen, the risks are controllable (except in highly leveraged positions) and the acceptable risks can be precisely isolated. Like [pure arbitrage](.md), relative [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) can be both static and dynamic. Let us consider examples of static relative [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md).  

Suppose you buy $\$100$ million of a 30-year US government bond. At the same time you sell (short) $\$102$ million of a 26-year bond. The amounts. $\$100$ and $\$102$ are chosen through "[duration](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%205/Key%20Rates%20O1s%20Durations%20and%20Hedging.md) matching" (Chapters 2 and 13) which ensures that when [interest rates](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) go up or down the gains on one position exactly offset the losses on the other. The only way the combined position makes or loses money is when [interest rates](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) do not change in parallel, i.e. the 30-year rates change by more or less than the 26-year rates. The combined position is not risk free. It is speculative, but only in a secondary risk factor. Investors seldom distinguish between 30- and 26-year rates; they worry more about the overall level of rates. The two rates tend to move closely together and the relative arbitrageur bets that they will diverge.  

The bulk of swap trading (Chapter 4) relies on static relative [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md). An [interest rate swap](../../../../Financial%20Engineering/Primer%20on%20Interest%20Rate%20Swaps.md) dealer agrees to pay a fixed coupon stream to a corporate customer, himself an issuer of a fixed-rate bond. The dealer hedges by buying a fixed-coupon government bond. He eliminates any exposure to interest rate movements as coupon receipts from the government bond offset the swap payments, but he is left with a swap spread risk. If the [credit quality](../../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%202-%20Debt%20Contracts%20due%20to%20Lack%20of%20Information/Wellman%20Inc%20the%20Importance%20of%20Loan%20Covenants.md) of the issuer deteriorates, the swap becomes "unfair' and the combined position has a negative present value to the dealer.  

Dynamic relative [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) is more complicated in that the hedge must be rebalanced continuously according to very specific computable rules. A seller of a 3-year over-the-counter (OTC) equity call may hedge by buying 3- and 6-month calls on the exchange and [shorting](../Chapter%202%20-%20Spot%20Markets/Short%20Selling.md) some of the stock. He then must rebalance the number of shares he is short on a daily basis as the price of those shares fluctuates. This so-called delta hedge (Chapters 5 and 6) eliminates exposure to the price risk. The unhedged exposure is to the [implied volatility](../Chapter%205%20Options%20on%20Prices%20and%20Hedge-Based%20Valuation/A%20Real-Life%20Option%20Pricing%20Exercise.md) differences between the options sold and bought. In the preceding static [swap example](../../../../Course%20Notes/Python/QuantLib-Python/Modeling%20Vanilla%20Interest%20Rate%20Swaps%20Using%20QuantLib%20Python.md), the swap dealer may elect not to match the cash flows exactly on each swap he enters into. Instead, he may trade a small ([duration](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%205/Key%20Rates%20O1s%20Durations%20and%20Hedging.md)-matched) number of "benchmark" bonds in order to offset the cash flows in bulk. The shortcut, however, will require him to dynamically rebalance the [portfolio](../../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md). of bonds.  

This book's main goal is to explain the functioning of [financial markets](../../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) by defining pure and relative value [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) linkages between different [market segments](Preview%20of%20the%20Book.md). The examples appear complicated as they involve multiple [futures](../Chapter%203%20-%20Futures%20Markets/Futures%20Not%20Subject%20to%20Cash-And-Carry.md), options and other [derivatives](../../../Financial%20Trading%20and%20Markets/Chapter%209%20Arbitrage%20and%20Hedging%20With%20Options.md), but they all relate to the same simple principle of profit through selective risk elimination.  

Definition Relative value [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) is defined as generating profit today by statically or. dynamically matching current and future obligations to nearly offset each other, net of incurring closely estimable financing costs.  

To an untrained eye, the difference between relative value [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) and speculation is tenuous. To a professional, the two are easily discernible. An equity trading strategy called "pairs trading' is a good case in point. The strategy of buying Pfizer (PFE) stock and selling GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) is pure speculation. One can argue that both companies are in pharmaceuticals, both are large with similar R&D budgets, and both tend to move together with the pharmaceutical sector as a whole. The specific risks of the two companies, however, are quite different and they cannot be considered close substitutes. Buying Polish zlotys with British pounds and selling Czech korunas for British pounds is also speculation, not relative value. [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md). Zlotys and korunas are not substitutes. An in-between case, but on the speculative side, is called a [basis trade](../../../../Financial%20Engineering/Basis%20Trade%20Explainer.md). If an airline needs to lock in the future prices of jet fuel, then. instead of entering into a long-term contract with a refiner, it buys a series of crude oil [futures](../Chapter%203%20-%20Futures%20Markets/Futures%20Not%20Subject%20to%20Cash-And-Carry.md) with the idea that supply shocks that cause oil prices to rise affect jet fuel prices in the same. way. When prices increase, the airline pays higher prices for jet fuel, but the profits from oil [futures](../Chapter%203%20-%20Futures%20Markets/Futures%20Not%20Subject%20to%20Cash-And-Carry.md) offset those increases, leaving the total cost of acquiring jet fuel unchanged. Buying. oil [futures](../Chapter%203%20-%20Futures%20Markets/Futures%20Not%20Subject%20to%20Cash-And-Carry.md) is appealing as it allows one to liquidate the protection scheme when prices decline instead of rising, or to exit half way through an increase. This trade is not uncommon, but it. exposes the airline to the [basis risk](../../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%208-%20Markets,%20Meltdowns,%20and%20Arbitrage/Lessons%20From%20The%20Crisis.md). When the supply shocks take place at the refinery level (not the oil delivery level), spot jet fuel prices may increase more rapidly than crude oil [futures](../Chapter%203%20-%20Futures%20Markets/Futures%20Not%20Subject%20to%20Cash-And-Carry.md).  

[Derivatives](../../../Financial%20Trading%20and%20Markets/Chapter%209%20Arbitrage%20and%20Hedging%20With%20Options.md) dealers want to make money on the [bid-ask spread](../../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Bid%20Ask%20and%20Transaction%20Prices%20in%20a%20Specialist%20Market%20With%20Heterogeneously%20Informed%20Traders.md) of their trading contracts. They rely on the relative value [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) principle to temporarily hedge the directional risk as they seek the other sides of the trades. When they sell options, they buy or sell the underlying stocks, bonds, or mortgages in the right proportions to exactly offset the value changes of. the option and the underlying, repeating the exercise every day until the options expire or are offset. The hedge proportions change every day, depending on the changing market factors -- such as the primary and secondary risks - to which the dealers are exposed. The dynamic rebalancing serves to offset the primary risks, but it does not offset all the risks. In this book, we learn how to (a) construct relative value trades with the right hedge ratios (deltas, durations) and (b) reduce the risk down to desired secondary factors (e.g. vega)..  

Relative value [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) in many markets relies on a building block of a static or dynamic. [cash-and-carry](../../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Carry%20Trade.md) trade. The static version of the [cash-and-carry](../../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Carry%20Trade.md) trade (introduced in Chapter 3) consists typically of a spot purchase (for cash) and a forward sell, or the reverse. The dynamic. trade (introduced in Chapters 5 and 6), as in the preceding option example, consists of a series of spot purchases or sales at different dates and a contingent payoff at the forward date. The spot and forward are tied together by the cost of financing, the carry, of the borrowing to buy spot or lending after a spot sale. Even the most complicated structured derivative transactions are combinations of [cash-and-carry](../../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Carry%20Trade.md) building blocks across different markets. When analyzing such trades, focusing on institutional and [market structure](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%2010/Market%20Structure%20and%20Size.md) details in each market can only cloud this basic block of [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md). In this book, we emphasize the common elements. We exploit the principle of [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) to show what motivates trades in each market ([stock index futures](../../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%202-Futures%20Contracts.md) vs stocks, fixed coupon stripping of bonds, triangular [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) in currencies) and between markets (simultaneous trades in currencies in money markets, [hedging](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%205/Key%20Rates%20O1s%20Durations%20and%20Hedging.md) mortgage servicing contracts with swap options, etc.)..  

Many readers view the no-[arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) conditions found in finance textbooks as strict mathe-. matical constructs. They are not mathematical at all. The equations do not represent the will. of God, like gravity or thermodynamics laws in physics. They are ensured by the most basic human characteristic: greed. Dealers tirelessly look to discover the violations of no-[arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md),. i.e. opportunities to buy an item at one price and sell a disguised version of that item for another price. By executing trades to take advantage of the temporary deviations from these paramount rules, they eliminate them by moving prices until money cannot be made and, by extension, the equations are satisfied.  

In this book, all the mathematical formulas are traced back to the financial transactions that. motivate them. The math serves to get the trade ratios right, but the key is to learn what to do to profit when the math is not satisfied in the markets. We overemphasize the difference between the extremes of speculation and [pure arbitrage](.md) in order to bring out the relative value [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) (mis-called risk [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md)). Apart from tiny commissions, traders earn profit from "spread" -. a reward for relative value risk [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md). A swap trader, who fixes the borrowing rate for a corporate client, hedges by selling Treasury bonds. He engages in a relative value trade (swaps. vs government bonds) that exposes him to swap spread movements. A bank, that borrows by. opening new checking deposits and lends by issuing mortgages, eliminates the risk of parallel interest rate movements, but leaves itself exposed to yield curve tilts (non-parallel movements). or [default risk](../Chapter%207%20-%20Default%20Risk%20and%20Credit%20Derivatives/Default%20Risk%20and%20Credit%20Derivatives%20183.md). In all these cases, the largest risks (the exposure to [interest rate changes](../../../../International%20Finance/Bridgewater/How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke/How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke-Chapter%2012%20to%20Chapter%2014.md)) are hedged out, and the dealer is only exposed to secondary ones (swap spread, default).  

Under our definition, most of what is conventionally labeled [investment](../../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md), qualifies as specu-. lation. Over a long time, stocks should rise as the economy grows and productivity increases.. Yet a stock investor, who directly or indirectly through pension and mutual funds "invests, but does not hedge or risk-share in some way, takes. $100\%$ of the price risk. He speculates,. with positive odds perhaps. [Financial institutions](../../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) also do this: as their assets grow, they put their capital to use in new products and services. They speculate on their success..  

The trading activity of many institutional dealers is not driven by the outright buy-low/sellhigh speculation. To avoid taking primary risks by speculating on markets going up or down,. traders hedge the primary risks; they leave themselves exposed only to secondary "spread" risks. Well-managed [financial institutions](../../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) are compensated for knowing and taking those secondary risks; poorly managed ones lose money betting on primary risks. Nearly everyone has heard of the Barings, IG Metallgesellschaft, and Orange County fiascos of the 1990s. AIG sold big bets on the [default risk](../Chapter%207%20-%20Default%20Risk%20and%20Credit%20Derivatives/Default%20Risk%20and%20Credit%20Derivatives%20183.md) without knowing or [hedging](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%205/Key%20Rates%20O1s%20Durations%20and%20Hedging.md) any of them, and lost heavily in 2008. History is filled with examples of [financial institutions](../../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) that were bankrupted as a result of gambling.  

Institutional trading [floors](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%2016/Caps%20and%20Floors.md) are designed to best take advantage of relative [arbitrage](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) within each market and between markets. Individual trading desks, surrounded by associated marketing and clearing teams, cover customers within a specific market segment. Trading desks that are likely to buy each other's products are placed next to each other. Special proprietary desks (for short called prop or arb desks) deal with many customer desks of the same firm or other firms and many outside customers in various markets. Their job is to focus on relative value trades or outright speculation across markets. The distinction between the customer vs proprietary desks is in constant flux as markets expand and shrink and desks collaborate with each other. For example, a money market desk arranges an issuance of short-term paper whose coupon depends on a [stock index](../../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Hedging%20Strategies%20with%20Forwards.md). It then arranges a trade between the customer and its swap desk to alter the [interest rate exposure](../../PART%20III%20THE%20PLAYERS/Chapter%2013%20-%20Banks%20Asset-Liability%20Management/Duration%20Gap%20Management.md) profile and between the customer and the equity. [derivatives](../../../Financial%20Trading%20and%20Markets/Chapter%209%20Arbitrage%20and%20Hedging%20With%20Options.md) desk to eliminate the customer's exposure to equity risk. The customer ends up with low cost of financing and no equity risks..  