# Bank Risks  

“You got to know when to hold ‘em, know when to fold ‘em. Know when to walk away and know when to run.”  

Kenny Rogers  

# GLOSSARY OF TERMS  

[Credit Risk](../../Course%20Notes/Quantitative%20Trading%20Strategies%20Lecture%20Notes.md) The risk that a borrower will fail to satisfy the terms of their loan contract.   
ERM Enterprise [Risk Management](../../Financial%20Engineering/Financial%20Mathematics%20Course.md), an integrative approach to [risk management](../../Financial%20Engineering/Financial%20Mathematics%20Course.md).   
[Interest Rate Risk](../../Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing/Analysis%20of%20Fixed%20Income%20Securities.md) The risk that [interest rates](../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) will change, causing the value of the bank’s net assets to change.   
[Liquidity Risk](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Asset%20Backed%20Commercial%20Paper%20Understanding%20the%20Risks.md) The risk that an asset holder is forced to sell at a price lesser than the value obtainable if time were not constraining.  

# INTRODUCTION  

Risk is one of those concepts with a long history and diverse interpretations.1 Because the future is always shrouded, risk is fundamental to all human endeavors. It is, however, central to [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md). Think in terms of the “core competence” of a business, its special skill, knowledge, or repute that enables it to earn an enhanced return in the service of its clientele. Without this edge, the service becomes commoditized by competitors who bid down prices to the point where profit vanishes  This core competence imparts to the producer an advantage in managing a risk inherent in the production of a particular service or economic good. These are the core risks that correspond to core competencies. For example, General Motors and Toyota presumably possess a core competence in the manufacture of automobiles, which corresponds to a unique skill in managing risks of auto safety and the provision of reliable transportation. This is why the failure of ignition switches in General Motors vehicles and accelerator and braking systems in Toyotas cost lives and exposed both to costly risk-management failures. Reputational capital was dissipated, sales were lost, and lawsuits proliferated.  

But what do we mean by risk? In the context of business, risk is the distillate of randomness in the process by which earnings are generated. This randomness may be mitigated through the application of a producer’s core competencies, in which case the risk is voluntarily accepted, even sought, as a business decision; hence a “businessman’s risk.” Alternatively, the risk may be unavoidable, as in the case of a force majeure or an “act of god.” In this case, the only protection may be insurance, if available, or leaving the industry. The risks in business are as varied as life itself. The businessman faces possible losses owing to flood, plague, fire, machine failure, worker alienation, sabotage, war, or capricious acts of government which destroy or appropriate property ([sovereign risk](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%208-%20Inflation%20&%20Sovereign%20Default%20Risk.md)). Shoe stores as well as [financial intermediaries](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%203-%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Loan%20Monitoring%20,%20Intro%20to%20Bankruptcy%20and%20Debt%20Restructuring/Financial%20Intermediation%20as%20Delegated%20Monitoring.md) face all of these risks, but banks and other [financial intermediaries](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%203-%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Loan%20Monitoring%20,%20Intro%20to%20Bankruptcy%20and%20Debt%20Restructuring/Financial%20Intermediation%20as%20Delegated%20Monitoring.md) specialize in financial contracting and thereby rely upon counterparties’ performance under their contracts. Counterparty performance is rarely assured, but it can be improved with the application of banker skills. Hence, the mitigation, control, even avoidance, of [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) risks.  

This raises the question of which risks are retained by the institution and which are shifted to others via some form of insurance. Core risks, which firms manage at a profit are accompanied by ancillary risks, all the many other risks that arise in the business but for which the business possesses no special skills in processing. These ancillary risks will require management nonetheless if they are not to prove destructive. Ancillary risk will be shifted to others through various means – using capital or insurance markets, modifying operations, or in extremis avoiding lines of business. Not all ancillary risk is avoidable, however, if one is to remain in a particular business. A residual of ancillary risk will remain to be protected against with bank equity, but fortunately one firm’s ancillary risk is likely to be another’s core risk, giving rise to trade in risks that permit mitigation, enhance production and the general welfare.  

Risk is central to [financial intermediaries](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%203-%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Loan%20Monitoring%20,%20Intro%20to%20Bankruptcy%20and%20Debt%20Restructuring/Financial%20Intermediation%20as%20Delegated%20Monitoring.md) in the sense that clients see these institutions as fundamentally providing a risk-abatement service. Using our automobile example, customers are motivated by a need for safe and convenient transportation services. In contrast, [financial intermediaries](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%203-%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Loan%20Monitoring%20,%20Intro%20to%20Bankruptcy%20and%20Debt%20Restructuring/Financial%20Intermediation%20as%20Delegated%20Monitoring.md) are asked to provide credit, [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md), interest rate certainty, and various types of insurance all of which alleviate risks for customers. Indeed, these special financial risks define categories  