---
title: '(17) How Countries Go Broke: Introduction & Chapter One  | LinkedIn'
source: 
  https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-countries-go-broke-introduction-chapter-one-ray-dalio-3wjae/
description:
tags:
  - big_debt_crisis
  - debt_cycle
  - government_debt
  - interest_rates
  - reserve_currency
aliases:
  - Big Debt Cycle
  - Debt Crisis
  - Debt and Debt Growth
  - How Countries Go Broke
key_concepts:
  - Big debt cycle
  - Global macro investor
  - Interest rates and debt
  - Limits to country debt?
  - Reserve currency and debt
---
[Introduction]([[Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Introduction) to [How Countries Go Broke](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke-Chapter%2012%20to%20Chapter%2014.md)]]

**Are there limits to a country’s’ [debt and debt growth](.md)?**

**What will happen to [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) and all that they affect if [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) growth isn’t slowed?**

**Can a big, important country that has a major reserve [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) like the US go broke—and, if so, what would that look like?**

**Is there such a thing as a “[Big Debt Cycle](.md)” that we can track that will tell us when to worry about debt and what to do about it?**

**These aren’t just academic questions for academic economists. They are questions that investors, [policy makers](../Chapters/Inflationary%20Depressions%20and%20Currency%20Crises.md), and most everyone must answer because the answers will have huge effects on all our well-beings and what we should do. But definitive answers don’t currently exist.**

At this time, some people believe that there isn't any limit to [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) and debt growth, especially if a country has a reserve [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). That’s because they believe that the central bank of a reserve [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) country that has its money widely accepted around the world can always print the money to service its debts. Others believe that the high levels of debt and rapid debt growth are harbingers of a big [debt crisis](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%20(2007–2011).md) on the horizon, but they do not know exactly how and when the crisis will come—or what its impacts will be.

And what about the big, long-term [debt cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md)? While the “[business cycle](../../Economic%20Stabilization%20Notes/Business%20Cycles-%20Introduction,%20Characteristics,%20and%20History.md)” is widely acknowledged and some people recognize that it is driven by a [short-term debt](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/When%20Safe%20Proved%20Risky%20Commercial%20Paper%20During%20the%20Financial%20Crisis%20of%202007%202009.md) cycle, that is not true for the big, long-term [debt cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md). Nobody acknowledges it or talks about it. I couldn’t find any good studies or descriptions of it in textbooks, and even the world’s leading economists—including those who are now running, or in the past ran, central banks and government Treasuries—didn’t have much to say about this critically important subject when I explored it with them. That is why I did this study and am passing it along.

**Before I get into all that, I should begin by explaining where I’m coming from. I don’t come to this subject as an economist. I come as a [global macro investor](.md) who for over 50 years has been through many debt cycles in many countries and has had to navigate and understand them well enough to bet on how they would go. I have carefully studied all the big debt cycles over the last 100 years, and superficially studied many more from the past 500 years, so I believe that I understand how to navigate them. Because I am now deeply concerned, I feel a responsibility to pass along this study for others to assess for themselves.**

To gain my understanding, I look at many cases like a doctor studies many cases, examining the mechanics behind them to understand the [cause/effect relationships](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Principles%20Part%20II.md) that drive their progressions. I also learn from being in these experiences, reflecting on what I learn, writing it up, and having smart people read and challenge it. Then I build systems to place my bets on what I learned and have new experiences. I do that over and over and will do it until I die because I love it. Because my game has been to bet on the markets and because the debt markets drive just about everything, I have been obsessed with studying debt dynamics for decades. I believe that if you understand these dynamics, you can do very well as an investor, businessperson, or policy maker, and if you don’t, you ultimately will be hurt by them.

**Through my research, I discovered that there are big, long-term debt cycles that have unfailingly led to big debt bubbles and busts. I saw that only about 20% of the roughly 750 [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md)/debt markets that have existed since 1700 remain and that all these remaining ones have been severely devalued** **through the mechanistic process I am going to describe in this study. I saw how this big, long-term [debt cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md) was described in the Old Testament, how it repeatedly played out in Chinese dynasties over thousands of years, and how time and again it has foreshadowed [the fall](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Fall%20of%20Bear%20Stearns%20Lost%20Opportunities%20Haunt%20Final%20Days%20of%20Bear%20Stearns;%20Executives%20Bickeredover%20Raising%20Cash%20Cutting%20Mortgages.md) of empires, countries, and provinces.**

**These Big Debt Cycles have always worked in timeless and universally consistent ways that are not well understood but should be. In this study, I hope to explain how they work with such clarity that my description will serve as a template that can be used to see what is going on with, and what is likely to happen to, money and debt. While I recognize that the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) template I will describe has not previously been vetted, I am confident it exists because I have made a lot of money using it to bet on how things would go. I am passing it along because I am now at a stage of life in which I want to share what I have learned that I have found of value. You can do what you like with it.**

Why do I think I understand something that others don’t? I theorize that this is for a few reasons. First, this dynamic is not widely understood because big, long-term debt cycles typically last about one lifetime—roughly 80 years (give or take 25 years)—so we don’t get to learn about them through experience. Second, because we focus so much on what is happening to us at the time it is happening, people overlook the big picture. I also think there are [biases](../../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Lecture%20Notes%20Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Week%202/Week%202%20Fundamentals%20Of%20Forecasting.md) against being concerned about too much debt because most people like the spending ability that credit gives them, and it is also true that there have been many warnings about pending debt crises that never happened. Memories of [big debt crises](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Principles%20Part%20II.md) like the 2008 [global financial crisis](../../../Financial%20Engineering/8.%20Credit%20Modeling%20and%20Credit%20Derivatives.md) and the European [debt crisis](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%20(2007–2011).md) of the PIIGS countries (Portugal, Italy, Ireland, [Greece](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Assignments/Solutions/PSET%203%20Solution-Financial%20Instruments.md), and Spain) have faded, and since we have gotten past them, many people assume that [policy makers](../Chapters/Inflationary%20Depressions%20and%20Currency%20Crises.md) learned how to manage them rather than view these cases as early warnings of bigger crises on the horizon. But whatever the reason, it doesn’t matter exactly why these dynamics are overlooked. I am going to paint a picture of what happens and why, and if there is enough interest in what I’m saying, my template will be assessed and will live or die on its merits.

That leads me to a principle:

- ***If we don’t agree on how things work, we won’t be able to agree on what’s happening or what is likely to happen.*** For that reason, I need to lay out my picture of how the machine works and try to triangulate with you and other knowledgeable people about it before moving on to look at what’s happening and what might happen.

At a time when [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) is large and increasing rapidly, it seems to me dangerously negligent to assume that this time will be different from other times without first studying how other cases transpired. It would be like assuming that we will never have a civil war or world war again because they haven’t happened before in our lifetimes without studying the mechanics that brought them about in the past. (By the way, I believe that both the civil war and world war dynamics are also going on today.) As in my other books,\[1\] I will create a description of the archetypical dynamic and then look at how and why different cases transpired differently so that one can track current cases relative to the template and put into context what’s happening and what’s likely to happen. In that way, you will both see many cases of this happening and get a peek into the future. Comparing what is happening with that template leads me to believe that we are heading into one of those cases in which [central governments](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%204%20&%20Chapter%205.md) and central banks will “go broke” in the ways that have happened hundreds of times before and have had big political and geopolitical consequences.

This brings me to an important point. ***The [Big Debt Cycle](.md) is just one of several interrelated forces that together make up what I call the overall [Big Cycle](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%202%20&%20Chapter%203.md). For example, 1) Big Debt Cycles influence and are affected by largely coinciding 2) big cycles of political and social harmony and conflict within countries that are both affected by and affect 3) big cycles of geopolitical harmony and conflict between countries. These cycles in turn are affected by both 4) big [acts of nature](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%202%20&%20Chapter%203.md), like droughts, floods, and pandemics and 5) developments of big new technologies. Combined, these five forces make up the overall [Big Cycle](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%202%20&%20Chapter%203.md) of peace and prosperity and conflict and depression.*** Because these forces affect each other and practically everything, they must be thought of together. How these forces have worked and interacted and are working and interacting now is covered in much greater detail in my book and video titled *Principles for Dealing with the [Changing World Order](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Principles%20Part%20II.md)* and to a lesser extent in Chapter 17 of this study, which is the concluding chapter. In this study, I will be mostly focusing on the [Big Debt Cycle](.md), though we will see many references to the ways in which the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) interacts with the other forces to create the path that we are on.

This study consists of four parts and 17 chapters. Part 1 describes the [Big Debt Cycle](.md), at first very simply, then in a more complete and mechanical way, and then with some equations that show the mechanics and help with making projections of what is likely to happen. Part 2 shows what has actually happened across 35 [Big Debt Cycle](.md) cases, laying out in a detailed template the typical sequence of events that signifies how a cycle is transpiring and shows symptoms that can help identify how far the cycle has progressed. Part 3 reviews the most recent [Big Debt Cycle](.md), which started when the new monetary and world orders began in 1944 at the end of World War II and brings it up to the present. In that part, in addition to looking at the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) and the overall [Big Cycle](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%202%20&%20Chapter%203.md) with a focus on the US (because it has been the world’s major reserve [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) country and the world’s leading power, thus making it the world’s leading shaper of what one might call the American world order since 1944), I also very briefly describe the Big Cycles of both China and Japan, showing them from the 1860s until now. This will give you a more complete picture of what has happened in the world since 1944 and provide two other [Big Debt Cycle](.md) cases to look at. Finally, in Part 4, I will peek into the future, looking at what my calculations say about what is required for the US to manage its debt burden, and how the [five big forces](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke-Chapter%208%20to%20Chapter%2011.md) might unfold in the years ahead.

Because I recognize that there are different readers who have different levels of expertise and want to give different amounts of time to this and I want to help you get what you want out of this, **I put the most important points in bold so you can read just the most essential stuff and optionally dive into the details that interest you.** ***I put what I believe are timeless and universal principles in italics.*** If you are a professional or aspiring professional who is really into economics and markets, I recommend that you read the whole thing because I believe that it will give you a unique perspective that you will enjoy and will help you to be successful in your job. If you are not, I recommend that you just read what is in bold. Also, because I’d love to have a two-way conversation with you to try to get in sync about what’s true and what to do about it, I am working on a few new technologies for doing that, which I will tell you about later.

**In the next chapter, I will describe the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) in just seven pages. If you want to stop there, that’s perfectly fine.**

I hope that you will find the study’s analysis helpful.

## Part 1: Overview of the Big Debt Cycle

### Chapter 1: The Big Debt Cycle in a Tiny Nutshell

**My goal for this chapter is to convey in seven pages a very brief but complete description of the mechanics of a typical [Big Debt Cycle](.md).**

**How the Machine Works**

**Credit is the primary vehicle for funding spending and it can easily be created.\[2\] Because one person’s spending is another’s earnings, when there is a lot of credit creation, people spend and earn more, most asset prices go up, and most everyone loves it. Paying back debt is much less enjoyable. As a result, [central governments](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%204%20&%20Chapter%205.md) and central banks have a bias toward creating a lot of credit. Credit also creates debt that has to be paid back, which has the opposite effect—i.e., when debts have to be paid back, it creates less spending, lower incomes, and lower asset prices, which people don’t like. In other words, when someone (a borrower-debtor) borrows money (called principal) at a cost (an interest rate), the borrower-debtor can spend more money than they have in earnings and savings over the near term. But over the long term, this requires them to pay back (the principal + interest) and when they have to pay it back, it requires them to spend less money than they have. This dynamic is why** ***the credit/spending/debt-paying-back dynamic is inherently cyclical.***

**The [Short-Term Debt](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/When%20Safe%20Proved%20Risky%20Commercial%20Paper%20During%20the%20Financial%20Crisis%20of%202007%202009.md) Cycle**

**Everyone who has been around long enough to be affected by it several times should be well-acquainted with the [short-term debt](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/When%20Safe%20Proved%20Risky%20Commercial%20Paper%20During%20the%20Financial%20Crisis%20of%202007%202009.md) cycle. It starts with money and credit being provided readily when economic activity and [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) are lower than desired, and when [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) are low relative to [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) rates and low in relation to the rates of return on other investments. Those conditions encourage borrowing to spend and invest, which causes asset prices, economic activity, and [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) to pick up until they are higher than desired, at which time money and credit are restrained, and [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) become relatively high in relation to [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) rates and rates of return on other investments. This leads to less borrowing to spend and invest, which leads to lower asset prices, a slowing of economic activity, and lower [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md), which leads [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) to come down, money and credit to become easier, and the cycle to begin again. These cycles have typically lasted about six years, give or take three years.**

**[Short-Term Debt](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/When%20Safe%20Proved%20Risky%20Commercial%20Paper%20During%20the%20Financial%20Crisis%20of%202007%202009.md) Cycles Add up to Big, Long-Term Debt Cycles**

**What isn’t paid enough attention is the way in which these [short-term debt](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/When%20Safe%20Proved%20Risky%20Commercial%20Paper%20During%20the%20Financial%20Crisis%20of%202007%202009.md) cycles add up to big, long-term debt cycles. Because credit is a stimulant that creates a high, people want more of it, so there is a bias toward creating it. This leads debt to rise over time, which typically leads to most of the short-term cyclical highs and lows in debt to be higher than the ones before. These add up to create the long-term [debt cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md), which ends when it becomes unsustainable. The capacity to take on more debt is different early in the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) when debt burdens are lower and there is more potential for credit/debt to be able to fund highly profitable endeavors than it is later in the cycle when debt burdens are higher, and lenders have fewer productive options.**

**In that early part, it is easy to borrow—even to borrow a lot—and pay it back. These early short-term cycles are primarily driven by the previously described availability and economics of [borrowing and spending](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Understanding%20Debt%20Crises%20and%20Their%20Management.md), and also a lingering cautiousness brought about by memories of the pain of the most recent time when money was tight.\[3\] Early in the [Big Debt Cycle](.md), when debts and total [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) are relatively low in relation to incomes and other assets, increases and decreases in credit, spending, debt, and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) are primarily determined by the previously described incentives with less risk. But late in the [Big Debt Cycle](.md), when debts and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) costs get high relative to income and the value of other assets that can be used to meet one’s [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) obligations, the risks of default are higher. Also, late in the [Big Debt Cycle](.md), when there are a lot of debt assets and liabilities relative to income, the balancing act of trying to keep [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) high enough to satisfy lender-creditors without having them too high for borrower-debtors becomes more challenging. That’s because one person’s debts are another’s assets and both must be satisfied. So, while [short-term debt](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/When%20Safe%20Proved%20Risky%20Commercial%20Paper%20During%20the%20Financial%20Crisis%20of%202007%202009.md) cycles end because of the previously described economic considerations, long-term debt cycles end because the debt burdens are too great to be sustained. Said differently, because it is more enjoyable to borrow and spend, if one isn’t careful, debt and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) can grow like a cancer, eating up one’s buying power and squeezing out other consumption. This is what makes the long-term [Big Debt Cycle](.md).**

**Throughout the millennia and across countries, what has driven the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) and has created the big market and economic problems that go along with it is the creation of unsustainably large amounts of debt assets and debt liabilities relative to the amounts of money, goods, services, and [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) assets in existence.**

***Said more simply, a debt is a promise to deliver money. A [debt crisis](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%20(2007–2011).md) occurs when there have been more promises made than there is money to deliver on them. When that happens, the central bank is forced to choose between a) printing a lot of money and devaluing it or b) not printing a lot of money and having a big debt default crisis. In the end, they always print and devalue. Either way—via default or devaluation—the creation of too much debt eventually causes debt assets (e.g., bonds) to be worth less.***

**While there are variations in how each of these cases plays out, the most important factor is whether the debt is denominated in a [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) that the central bank can “print”. But no matter the variation we almost always see that it becomes relatively undesirable to hold the debt assets (i.e., bonds) relative to holding the productive capacity of the economy (i.e., equities) and/or owning other, more stable forms of money (e.g., gold).**

To me it is interesting and inappropriate that, when [credit rating agencies](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%208-%20Markets,%20Meltdowns,%20and%20Arbitrage/Moody's%20Lessons%20From%20the%20Crisis.md) rate the credit of a central government, they don’t rate the [riskiness](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Financial%20Derivatives%20and%20Quantitative%20Methods/Risk%20Preferences.md) of its debt losing value. They only rate the risk of default on the debt, which gives the misimpression that all higher-rated debt is a safe storehold of value. Said differently, because central banks can bail out [central governments](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%204%20&%20Chapter%205.md), the [riskiness](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Financial%20Derivatives%20and%20Quantitative%20Methods/Risk%20Preferences.md) of [central governments](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%204%20&%20Chapter%205.md)’ debts are hidden. Creditors would be better served if the rating agencies rated the [riskiness](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Financial%20Derivatives%20and%20Quantitative%20Methods/Risk%20Preferences.md) of the debt losing value through both default and devaluation. After all, these bonds are supposed to be storeholds of wealth and should be rated as such. As you will see in this study, that is how I look at bonds. For countries with debts denominated in their own currencies (i.e., in a [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) they can print), I rate [central governments](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%204%20&%20Chapter%205.md)’ debts separately from their central banks to show how risky they are, and I rate the risks of central banks’ debts by considering the risk of the devaluation of money to be as, if not more, probable than a default on [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md).

**Default or devaluation, I don’t care. What I care about is losing my storehold of wealth, which inevitably will happen one way or another.**

**Following the [Debt Cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md)’s Progression**

**The main difference between a [short-term debt](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/When%20Safe%20Proved%20Risky%20Commercial%20Paper%20During%20the%20Financial%20Crisis%20of%202007%202009.md) cycle and a long-term (big) [debt cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md) has to do with the central bank’s ability to turn them around. For the [short-term debt](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/When%20Safe%20Proved%20Risky%20Commercial%20Paper%20During%20the%20Financial%20Crisis%20of%202007%202009.md) cycle, its contraction phase can be reversed with a heavy dose of money and credit that brings the economy up from a depressed disinflationary state because the economy has the capacity to produce another phase of noninflationary growth. But the long-term [debt cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md)’s contraction phase cannot be reversed by producing more money and credit because existing levels of debt growth and debt assets are unsustainable and holders of debt assets want to get out of them because they believe that, one way or another, they will be poor storeholds of wealth.**

Think of the [Big Debt Cycle](.md)’s progression like the progression of a disease or a life cycle through stages that exhibit different symptoms. By identifying these symptoms one can identify approximately where the cycle is in its progression with some [expectations](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing/Fixed%20Income%20Lecture%20Notes/FORWARD%20RATES%20AND%20TERM%20STRUCTURE.md) of how it is likely to progress from there. Described most simply, the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) moves from sound/hard money and credit to increasingly loose money and credit to a debt bust that leads to a return to sound/hard money and credit brought about by necessity. More specifically, at first there is heathy borrowing by the private sector that can be paid back; then the private sector overborrows, has losses, and has problems paying it back; then the government sector tries to help, overborrows, has losses, and has problems paying it back; then the central bank tries to help by “[printing money](../Chapters/Inflationary%20Depressions%20and%20Currency%20Crises.md)” and buying the [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md), and has problems paying it back, which leads it to monetize a lot more debt if it can (i.e., if the debt is denominated in the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) that it can print). Though not all cases progress in exactly the same way, most cases progress through the following five stages:

**1)      The Sound Money Stage: When net debt levels are low, money is sound, the country is competitive, and debt growth fuels productivity growth, which creates incomes that are more than enough to pay back the debts. This leads to increases in financial wealth and confidence.**

- Credit is the promise to deliver money. Unlike credit which requires a payment of money at a later date, money settles transactions—i.e., if money is given the transaction is complete, whereas if credit is given money is owed. It’s easy to create credit. Anyone can create credit but not anyone can create money. For example, I can create credit by accepting your promise to pay me money even if you don’t have the money. As a result, credit easily grows so there is much more credit than there is money. The most effective money is both a medium of exchange and a storehold of wealth that is widely accepted around the world. At the early stage of the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) money is “hard,” which means that it is a medium of exchange that is also a storehold of wealth that can’t easily be increased in supply, such as gold, sterling silver, and Bitcoin. Cryptocurrency like Bitcoin is now emerging as an accepted hard [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) because it is a [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) that is widely accepted around the world and is limited in supply. The biggest, most common risk to money becoming an ineffective storehold of wealth is the risk that a lot of it will be created. Imagine having the ability to create money; who wouldn’t be tempted to do a lot of that? Those who can always are. That creates the [Big Debt Cycle](.md). In the early part of the [Big Debt Cycle](.md), a) money is typically hard—e.g., gold—and the paper money that circulates like money is convertible into the “hard money” at a fixed price and b) there isn’t a lot of paper money and debt (which is the promise to pay money) outstanding. The [Big Debt Cycle](.md) consists of the building up of a) “paper money” and debt assets/liabilities relative to b) “hard money” and real assets (e.g., goods and services) and relative to the income that is required to service the debt. Basically, the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) works like a Ponzi scheme or musical chairs with investors holding an increasing amount of debt assets in the belief that they can convert them into money that will have buying power to get real things, yet as the amount of the debt assets that are held up by that faith increases relative to the real things, that conversion becomes more obviously impossible until that is realized and the process of selling the debt to get the hard money and real assets begins.
- At the early stage of the [debt cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md), private and [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) ratios are 1) low relative to incomes and/or 2) low relative to liquid assets. For example, [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) are low relative to government tax revenue and/or low relative to government liquid assets (e.g., reserves and other savings such as sovereign wealth assets) that can easily be converted into money. For example, when the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) that we are in began in 1944, the ratios of a) US [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) and b) US money supply divided by the amount of gold the US government had were equal to a) 7x and b) 1.3x respectively, whereas now these ratios are a) 37x and b) 6x respectively.
- During this early stage in the cycle, debt levels, debt growth, economic growth, and [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) are neither too hot nor too cold and finances are both sound.
- At this stage in the cycle, “risky assets” are relatively inexpensive relative to “safe” assets. That is because the memories of the prior period in which there was great damage done affects psychology and [pricing](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md). For example, in the late 1940s and early 1950s stock earning’s yields were roughly 4x that of bond yields.
- During this stage, there is a healthy economy and good [investment returns](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%208-%20Markets,%20Meltdowns,%20and%20Arbitrage/Long%20Term%20Capital%20Management%20L.p.%20(a).md) that lead to the next stage.

**2)      The Debt Bubble Stage: When debt and [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) growth are greater than can be serviced from the incomes being produced.**

- In this stage, money is readily available and cheap, there is a debt-financed economic expansion and an economic boom. Demands for and prices of goods, services, and [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) assets are driven up by a lot of debt-financed buying, sentiment is very bullish, and, by most conventional measures, the market is overpriced.
- In this stage, there are typically amazing new inventions that are truly transformative that investors invest in without an ability or care to assess whether the present value of their [future cash flows](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Advanced%20Derivatives%20Pricing%20Methodology.md) will be greater or less than their costs.
- This dynamic eventually produces a bubble that is reflected in the rates of debt and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) growth to finance speculation being greater than the income growth rates that are needed to service the debts. In this stage, markets and economies seem great, most everyone believes that they will get better, they are financed by a lot of borrowing, and “wealth” is created out of nothing. By wealth being created out of nothing, I mean that there is greater imagined wealth rather than actual existing wealth. For example, bubble periods are identifiable by extensive periods (e.g., three years) of debt growth that is significantly faster than income growth, high asset prices relative to traditional measures of the present values of likely [future cash flows](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Advanced%20Derivatives%20Pricing%20Methodology.md), and many other factors that I measure in my bubble indicator. (You can find the indicator [here](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/we-stock-market-bubble-ray-dalio-zpdre/).) A contemporary example is the unicorn that is valued at over $1 billion that has made the owner a “billionaire” on paper but has only raised $50 million in capital because speculative [venture capitalists](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Intangible%20Capitalism.md) put in the money to get option-like chips in case it does well. Bubbles can go on a while before the top is made. However, they inevitably lead to the next stage.

**3)      The Top Stage: When the bubble pops and there is a credit/debt/market/economic contraction.**

- The popping of the bubble occurs due to a combination of a tightening of money and the prior rate of debt growth being unsustainable. It is just that simple.
- When the bubble is popped, a self-reinforcing contraction begins so the debt problems spread very quickly, like an aggressive cancer, so it is very important for [policy makers](../Chapters/Inflationary%20Depressions%20and%20Currency%20Crises.md) to deal with it quickly, either to reverse it or to guide the deleveraging to its conclusion. In most cases, the debt contraction can be temporarily reversed by giving the system a heavy dose of what caused the debt problem—i.e., by creating more [credit and debt](../Chapters/Part%201%20The%20Archetypal%20Big%20Debt%20Cycle.md). That continues until it can’t continue anymore, at which time a big deleveraging occurs.

**4)      The Deleveraging Stage: When there is a painful bringing down of debt and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) levels to be in line with income levels so that the debt levels are sustainable.**

- At the beginning of this stage in the [Big Debt Cycle](.md), the first cracks typically spread from the private sector to the central government and then to the central bank. Net selling of debt assets, especially net selling of [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) assets, is a big red flag. When that happens conditions will deteriorate quickly unless managed very well and very quickly by [central governments](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%204%20&%20Chapter%205.md) and central banks. That selling takes the form of runs on banks. By “runs on banks” I mean the turning in of debt assets to get real money, which lenders like banks don’t have enough of. When debt problems become apparent, the holders of the debt assets sell their debt assets, which drives [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) on the debt up. This makes the debt more difficult to service, hence more risky, which drives [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) higher.
- The selling of the government’s debt leads to a) a free-market-driven tightening of money and credit, which leads to b) a weakening of the economy, c) downward pressure on the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md), and d) declining reserves as the central bank attempts to defend the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). Classically, these runs accelerate and feed on themselves as holders of debt assets see that, one way or another (through default or through the devaluation of their money), they will lose the buying power that they had believed was stored in these debt assets, causing great shifts in market values and wealth until debts are defaulted on, restructured, and/or monetized. Because this tightening proves too harmful for the economy, the central bank eventually simultaneously eases credit and allows a devaluation of the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). The devaluation of money can itself be the reason to sell the debt asset because it becomes a poor storehold of wealth. So, whether there is a tightening of money that leads to debt defaults and a bad economy or an easing of money that produces a devaluation of money and debt assets, it is not good for the debt asset. This dynamic creates what is called a death spiral because it is a self-reinforcing, debt-contraction dynamic in which the rising [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) cause problems that creditors see, leading them to sell the debt assets, which leads to even higher [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) or the need to print more money, which devalues the money and leads to even more selling of the debt assets and the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) and so on until the spiral runs its course. When this happens to [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md), the realization that too much debt is the problem naturally leads to the inclination to cut spending and borrowing. However, because one person’s spending is another’s income, cutting spending at such times typically only contributes to increases in debt-to-income ratios. That is typically when policies are shifted to a mix of debt restructurings and debt monetizations with the mix chosen primarily dependent on how much of the debt is denominated in the country’s [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). This defaulting on, restructuring of, and/or monetizing debt reduces the debt burdens relative to incomes until a new equilibrium is reached. The movement to a stable equilibrium typically takes place via a few painful adjustment spasms because borderline financial soundness is achieved before secure financial soundness.
- Classically, the deleveraging process progresses as follows. Early in this recession/depression phase, central banks bring [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) down and make credit more available. However, when a) debts are large and a debt contraction is underway, b) [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) can’t be lowered any more (i.e., when they fall around 0%), c) there is not enough demand for [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md), and d) the monetary easing is not enough to offset the self-reinforcing depressionary pressures, the central bank is forced to switch to new “tools” to stimulate the economy. Classically, to stimulate the economy the central bank must lower [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) to below nominal economic growth rates, [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) rates, and bond rates, but that is difficult to do when they approach 0%. At the same time, the central government is typically getting itself into a lot more debt because tax revenues are down and spending is up to support the private sector, yet there is not enough private sector demand to buy that debt. The central government experiences a debt squeeze in which the free-market demand for its debt falls short of the supply of it. If there is net selling of the debt, that creates a much worse problem.
- Often in this deleveraging stage of the cycle there is a “pushing on a string,” a phrase coined by [policy makers](../Chapters/Inflationary%20Depressions%20and%20Currency%20Crises.md) in the 1930s. It occurs late in the long-term [debt cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md) when central bankers struggle to convert their stimulative policies into increased spending because savers, investors, and businesses fear [borrowing and spending](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Understanding%20Debt%20Crises%20and%20Their%20Management.md) and/or there is deflation, so the risk-free interest that they are getting is relatively attractive to them. At such times, it is difficult to get people to stop saving in “cash” even when [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) go to 0% (or even below 0%). This phase is characterized by the economy entering a deflationary, weak, or negative growth period as people and investors hoard low-risk, typically government-guaranteed cash.
- At this stage, central banks must choose between keeping money “hard,” which will lead debtors to default on their debts, which will lead to deflationary depressions, or making money “soft” by printing a lot of it, which will devalue both it and the debt. Because paying off debt with hard money causes such severe market and [economic downturns](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%208-%20Markets,%20Meltdowns,%20and%20Arbitrage/How%20the%20Eggheads%20Cracked.md), when faced with this choice central banks always eventually choose to print and devalue money. Of course, each country’s central bank can only print that country’s money, which brings me to my next big point.
- At this stage, if it has the ability to “print money,” the central bank creates a substantial amount of money and credit and throws it aggressively at the markets. It typically buys [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) and private sector debt of systemically important entities that are at risk of defaulting (in order to make up for the private sector’s inadequate demand for debt and to keep [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) artificially low), and it sometimes buys equities and creates incentives for people to buy goods, services, and financial assets. At this stage, it is also typically desirable to devalue the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) because that is stimulative to the economy and raises [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) rates thus negating the deflationary pressures. If the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) is linked to gold, silver, or something else, that link is typically broken and there is a move to a [fiat monetary system](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%204%20&%20Chapter%205.md). If the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) isn’t linked—i.e., if the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) is already a fiat [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md)—devaluing it relative to other storeholds of wealth and other currencies is helpful. In some cases, the central bank’s moves can drive [nominal interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Real%20and%20Nominal%20Interest%20Rates%20and%20Term%20Struc.md) higher, either because the central bank tightens [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) to fight [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) or because it doesn’t tighten money to fight [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) and holders of the debt don’t want to buy the newly issued [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) and/or they want to sell it because it doesn’t provide an adequate return. It is important to watch real and [nominal interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Real%20and%20Nominal%20Interest%20Rates%20and%20Term%20Struc.md) and the supply and demand for debt to understand what is happening. At such times, extraordinary policies to get money like imposing extraordinary taxes and capital controls become common.
- This deleveraging stage is typically a painful time when debt burdens are reduced by defaults, restructurings, and/or devaluations. This is when an aggressive mix of debt restructurings and debt monetizations inevitably takes place to reduce the debt and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) burdens relative to incomes. In a typical deleveraging the debt-to-income ratio has the be lowered by roughly 50%, give or take about 20%. It can be done well or poorly. When it is done well, which I call a “beautiful deleveraging,” [central governments](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%204%20&%20Chapter%205.md) and central banks simultaneously do both debt restructurings and monetary stimulations in a balanced way. The restructurings reduce debt burdens and are deflationary while the monetary stimulations also reduce debt burdens (by providing money and credit to make it easier to buy debt) but are inflationary and stimulative to the economy so, if they get the balance right, positive growth occurs with falling debt burdens and acceptable [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md). Whether done well or poorly, this is the stage of the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) that reduces a lot of the debt burden and establishes the bottom that can be built on to begin the next [Big Debt Cycle](.md).

**5)      The Big [Debt Crisis](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%20(2007–2011).md) Recedes: When a new equilibrium is reached, and a new cycle begins.**

- **In order to have a viable money/credit/debt system, it is imperative that a) money/debt is sound enough to be a viable storehold of wealth, b) debt and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) burdens are in line with the incomes to service them so that debt growth is sustainable, c) creditors and debtors both believe that those things will exist, and d) the availability of money and credit and [real interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Real%20Interest%20Rates%20and%20Aggregate%20Production.md) begin to fall in line with that which is needed by both lender-creditors and borrower-debtors.** This late phase of the [Big Cycle](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%202%20&%20Chapter%203.md) is when there is a movement to those things happening. It requires both psychological and fundamental adjustments. After a big deleveraging, it is typically difficult to convince lender-creditors to lend because the devaluations/restructurings they experienced in the deleveraging make them risk-averse, so it is imperative that the central government and the central bank take credibility-restoring actions. These generally involve bringing their finances in order by a) the central government earning more money than it spends and/or b) the central bank making money hard again by offering high real yields, raising reserves, and/or linking the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) to something hard like gold or a strong [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). Typically, in this stage, [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) need to be relatively high in relation to [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md) rates and more than high enough to compensate for [currency weakness](../Chapters/Inflationary%20Depressions%20and%20Currency%20Crises.md), so it pays to be a lender and is costly to be a borrower. This stage of the cycle can be very attractive for lender-creditors.

**The stage that the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) is in is also reflected in the types of monetary policies being used.** As the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) progresses, central banks have to change how they run [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) in order to keep the credit/debt/economic expansion going, so by observing what type of [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) they are using, one can surmise about what stage the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) is in. **The phases in [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) and the conditions that lead to them are as follows:\[4\]**

**Phase 1: A Linked (i.e., Hard) Monetary System (MP1).** This is the type of [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) that existed from 1944 until 1971. This type of [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) ends when the debt bubble bursts, and there is the previously described “[run on the bank](../../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/PSET%206-%20Evaluating%20Bank%20Balance%20Sheets%20and%20Loan%20Portfolios.md)” dynamic, which is a run from credit assets to the hard money, and the limited amount of hard money causes massive defaults. This creates a compelling desire to print money rather than leave the supply of it limited by the supply of the gold or hard money that exists to be exchanged at the promised price.

**Phase 2: A Fiat Money, Interest-Rate-Driven [Monetary Policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) (MP2).** During this phase, [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md), bank reserves, and capital requirements are also controllers of the amounts of credit/debt growth. This fiat [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) phase both allows more flexibility and provides less assurance that money printing won’t be so large that it will devalue money and debt assets. The US was in this phase from 1971 until 2008. It ends when [interest rate changes](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke-Chapter%2012%20to%20Chapter%2014.md) no longer work (e.g., [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) hit 0% and there is a need to ease [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md)) and/or the private market demand for the debt being created falls short of the supply being sold so that, if the central bank did not print the money and buy the debt, money and credit would be tighter and [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) would be higher than desired.

**Phase 3: A [Fiat Monetary System](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%204%20&%20Chapter%205.md) with Debt Monetization (MP3).** This type of [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) is implemented by the central bank using its ability to create money and credit to buy [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) assets. It is the go-to alternative when [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) can no longer be lowered and when private market demand for debt assets (mostly bonds and mortgages though it can also include other financial assets like equities) is not large enough to buy the supply at an acceptable interest rate. It is good for financial asset prices, so it tends to benefit disproportionally those who have financial assets. It won’t effectively deliver money into the hands of those who are financially most stressed, and it won’t be very targeted. The US was in this phase from 2008 until 2020.

**Phase 4: A Fiat Money System with Coordinated Big Fiscal Deficit and Big Debt Monetization Policy (MP4).** This type of [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) is used when, in order to make the system work well, central government [fiscal policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) and central bank [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) have to be coordinated in order to get money and credit into the hands of people and entities that need it most. While creating money and credit typically temporarily alleviates the debt problem, it does not rectify the problem.

**Phase 5: A Big Deleveraging (MP5).** This is when there must be a big reduction in debt and [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) payments through a [debt restructuring](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%204-%20Restructuring%20Public%20Debt/Class%20Slide%204-Restructuring%20Debt%20Outside%20Bankruptcy.md) and/or a debt monetization. When managed in the best possible way—what I call a beautiful deleveraging—the deflationary ways of reducing debt burdens (e.g., through debt restructurings) are balanced with the inflationary ways of reducing debt burdens (e.g., by monetizing them), so that the deleveraging occurs without having unacceptable amounts of either deflation or [inflation](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md). The [Big Debt Cycle](.md) sequence to keep in mind is: first the private sector overborrows, has losses, and has problems paying it back (i.e., a [debt crisis](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%20(2007–2011).md)); then, to help, the government overborrows, has losses, and has problems paying it back; then, to help out, the central bank buys the [government debt](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Front%20Matter/Global%20Fixed%20Income%20Markets.md) and takes losses. To fund those purchases and to fund other debtors in trouble (because it is the “[lender of last resort](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/The%20Only%20Game%20in%20Town%20Walter%20Bagehot.md)”), the central bank prints a lot of money and buys a lot of debt. Then, at its worst, the central bank loses a lot of money on the debt it bought.

- While it is said that modern central bank “prints” money to buy the debt, the central bank doesn’t literally “print money.” Instead, it borrows money (reserves) from commercial banks that it pays a very [short-term interest rate](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%209/The%20Gauss%20Model.md) on. At its most extreme, the central bank can lose money because the interest earnings it gets on the debt it bought are less than the interest that it has to pay out on the money it borrowed, so when these amounts become large it can find itself in a self-reinforcing spiral of having to buy debt, which leads it to have losses and negative cash flows which leads it to need to print more money to service its debt and to need to buy more debt which ends up having more losses which requires it to do more of the same. This is the “death spiral” I mentioned earlier. When done in large amounts, the “printing” devalues the money and creates inflationary recessions or depressions. ***If [interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) rise, the central bank loses money on its bond holdings because the interest rate that it has to pay on its liabilities is greater than the interest rate it receives on the debt assets it bought. This is notable but not a big red flag until the central bank has a very large negative net worth and is forced to “print” more money to cover the negative [cash flow](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20I%20RELATIVE%20VALUE%20BUILDING%20BLOCKS/Chapter%201%20-%20Purpose%20and%20Structure%20of%20Financial%20Markets/Preview%20of%20the%20Book.md) that it experiences due to less money coming in on its assets than has to go out to service its liabilities.*** **That is what I mean when I say the central bank goes broke:** while the central bank doesn’t default on its debts, it can’t make its [debt service](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) payments without [printing money](../Chapters/Inflationary%20Depressions%20and%20Currency%20Crises.md).
- Eventually the debt restructurings and debt monetizations reduce the size of the debts relative to incomes and the [debt cycle](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md) runs its course.

**Phase 6: The Return to Hard Money (MP6).** In this phase the central government takes actions to restore the soundness of its money and credit/debt. This type of [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md) occurs after the debt has been written down through debt defaults/restructurings and debt monetizations so the debt levels relative to the incomes and amounts of money that are available to service the debts can be brought back into alignment. As previously described, it comes after those who held the debt assets were burned by the defaults and/or inflationary periods, so confidence in holding debt assets has to be rebuilt. At this stage, countries typically go back to MP1 (i.e., a hard-asset-backing [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md)) or MP2 (an interest rate/money supply-targeted [monetary policy](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Regime%20Change.md)) that is beneficial to lender-creditors via high [real interest rates](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Real%20Interest%20Rates%20and%20Aggregate%20Production.md).

**For great countries with great empires, the end of the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) has meant the end of their prominence.**

**A Few Concluding Observations**

- ***It pays to build up savings in the good times so there are savings to draw on in the bad times. There are costs to having too much savings as well as too little savings, and no one gets the balance exactly right.***
- ***[Big debt crises](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Principles%20Part%20II.md) are inevitable.*** **Throughout history only a very few well-disciplined countries have avoided them. That is because lending is never done perfectly relative to the incomes that are needed to service it. And it is often done badly because people always want more credit and that turns into debt. Debt levels get beyond that which is sustainable which leads to the need to bring the debt burdens down which typically leads to a mixture of debt defaults/restructurings and the creating of money and credit, leading a [debt crisis](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%20(2007–2011).md) to occur. And people’s psychology reinforces the cycle: the bubble period makes people more optimistic causing them to borrow more, and the bust causes people to be more pessimistic causing them to cut spending.** Even though this progression has happened many times in history, most [policy makers](../Chapters/Inflationary%20Depressions%20and%20Currency%20Crises.md) and investors think their current circumstances and monetary system won’t change. The change is unthinkable—and then it happens suddenly.
- ***The best way to anticipate a [debt crisis](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%20(2007–2011).md) happening is not by focusing on a single influence or number like debt as a percent of GDP; it is by understanding and focusing on a number of interrelated dynamics*** **that we will get into, especially in the next two chapters.**
- ***If debts are denominated in a country’s own [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md), its central bank can and will “print” the money to alleviate the [debt crisis](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%20(2007–2011).md).*** **This allows them to manage it better than if they couldn’t print the money, but of course it also reduces the value of the money. If the debt is not denominated in currencies that their central banks can print, then they will have debt defaults and deflationary depressions measured in the [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) that they owe and can’t print.**
- ***All debt crises, even big ones, can be managed well by economic [policy makers](../Chapters/Inflationary%20Depressions%20and%20Currency%20Crises.md) restructuring and monetizing them so that the deflationary ways of reducing the debt burdens (i.e., writing off and restructuring debt) and the inflationary ways of reducing debt burdens (creating money and credit and giving it to the debtors to make it easier for them to service their debts) balance each other. The key is to spread the paying back over time.*** **For example, if the debt-to-income ratio needs to fall by about 50% to make it sustainable, a [debt restructuring](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%204-%20Restructuring%20Public%20Debt/Class%20Slide%204-Restructuring%20Debt%20Outside%20Bankruptcy.md) that spreads it out to be at a rate of 3% or 4% per year would be much less traumatic than one that is about 50% in one year.**
- ***Debt crises provide great risks and opportunities that have been shown to both destroy empires and provide great [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) opportunities for investors if they understand how they work and have good principles for navigating them well.***
- **If you try to focus on debt cycles precisely or focus your attention on the short term you won’t see them.** It’s like comparing two snowflakes and missing that they are pretty much the same because they’re not exactly the same.

**That’s it in a nutshell.**

In the rest of this study I will get into the mechanics in greater depth, show the actual archetypical sequences that have played out over 35 cases, look at how the [Big Debt Cycle](.md) and [Big Cycle](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke%20-%20Chapter%202%20&%20Chapter%203.md) that includes the other big cycles  (for instance, cycles of internal and external order) that started in 1944 and that we are currently in the late stages of have transpired relative to this template, and briefly look at the Chinese and Japanese Big Cycles and a number of other cases. The Japanese case is interesting because Japan is further along in its [Big Debt Cycle](.md). Notably its large debt and debt monetizations have led to the depreciation of its [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) and debt, which led holders of its bonds to have losses of 45% relative to holding US dollar debt since 2013 and losses of 60% relative to holding gold since 2013. **In the final chapters, I will share how I am processing the US today relative to this template, how the US could reduce the risk of an acute [debt crisis](../Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%20(2007–2011).md),** and how I read the [Five Big Forces](How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke-Chapter%208%20to%20Chapter%2011.md) today.

View the next installation of this study [here](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-countries-go-broke-chapter-two-three-ray-dalio-w1gue).

*The views expressed in this article are mine and not necessarily Bridgewater’s.*

*The information provided herein is not intended to provide a sufficient basis on which to make an [investment decision](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Trading%20and%20Markets/Chapter%201%20Introduction%20to%20Securities%20Trading%20and%20Markets.md) and [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) decisions should not be based on simulated, hypothetical, or illustrative information that have inherent limitations. Unlike an actual performance record simulated or hypothetical results do not represent actual trading or the actual costs of management and may have under or overcompensated for the impact of certain [market risk](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Derivatives/Part%20I%20-%20Forwards%20and%20Futures/Chapter%205%20-%20Index%20Futures.md) factors. Bridgewater makes no representation that any account will or is likely to achieve [returns](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%203%20-%20%20Assets,%20Portfolios,%20and%20Arbitrage/Assets.md) similar to those shown. The price and value of the investments referred to in this research and the income therefrom may fluctuate. Every [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) involves risk and in volatile or uncertain market conditions, significant variations in the value or return on that [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) may occur. Investments in [hedge funds](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Basis%20Trade%20Explainer.md) are complex, speculative and carry a high degree of risk, including the risk of a complete loss of an investor’s entire [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md). Past performance is not a guide to future performance, future [returns](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%203%20-%20%20Assets,%20Portfolios,%20and%20Arbitrage/Assets.md) are not guaranteed, and a complete loss of original capital may occur. Certain transactions, including those involving [leverage](../../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md), [futures](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20I%20RELATIVE%20VALUE%20BUILDING%20BLOCKS/Chapter%203%20-%20Futures%20Markets/Futures%20Not%20Subject%20to%20Cash-And-Carry.md), options, and other [derivatives](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Trading%20and%20Markets/Chapter%209%20Arbitrage%20and%20Hedging%20With%20Options.md), give rise to substantial risk and are not suitable for all investors. Fluctuations in exchange rates could have material adverse effects on the value or price of, or income derived from, certain investments.*

*Bridgewater research utilizes data and information from public, private, and internal sources, including data from actual Bridgewater trades. Sources include BCA, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Bond Radar, Candeal, CBRE, Inc., CEIC Data Company Ltd., China Bull Research, Clarus Financial Technology, CLS Processing Solutions, Conference Board of Canada, Consensus Economics Inc., DataYes Inc, Dealogic, DTCC Data Repository, Ecoanalitica, Empirical Research Partners, Entis (Axioma Qontigo Simcorp), EPFR Global, Eurasia Group, Evercore ISI, FactSet Research Systems, Fastmarkets Global Limited, the Financial Times Limited, FINRA, GaveKal Research Ltd., Global Financial Data, GlobalSource Partners, Harvard Business Review, Haver Analytics, Inc., Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS), the [Investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) Funds Institute of Canada, ICE Derived Data (UK), [Investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) Company Institute, International Institute of Finance, [JP Morgan](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/The%20Fall%20of%20Bear%20Stearns.md), JSTA Advisors, M Science LLC, MarketAxess, Medley Global Advisors (Energy Aspects Corp), Metals Focus Ltd, Moody’s ESG Solutions, MSCI, Inc., National Bureau of Economic Research, Neudata, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Pensions & Investments Research Center, Refinitiv, Rhodium Group, RP Data, Rubinson Research, Rystad Energy, S&P Global Market Intelligence, Scientific Infra/EDHEC, Sentix GmbH, Shanghai Metals Market, Shanghai Wind Information, Smart Insider Ltd., Sustainalytics, Swaps Monitor, Tradeweb, United Nations, US Department of Commerce, Verisk Maplecroft, Visible Alpha, Wells Bay, Wind Financial Information LLC, Wood Mackenzie Limited, World Bureau of Metal Statistics, World Economic Forum, and YieldBook. While we consider information from external sources to be reliable, we do not assume responsibility for its accuracy.*

*This information is not directed at or intended for distribution to or use by any person or entity located in any jurisdiction where such distribution, publication, availability, or use would be contrary to applicable law or regulation, or which would subject Bridgewater to any registration or licensing requirements within such jurisdiction. No part of this material may be (i) copied, photocopied, or duplicated in any form by any means or (ii) redistributed without the prior written consent of Bridgewater® Associates, LP.*

---

\[1\] While debt and [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) cycles are comprehensively covered in my book *Principles for Navigating [Big Debt Crises](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Principles%20Part%20II.md)* (which looked at all of the 48 biggest debt crises in the 100 years between 1918 and 2018, the year I published the book) and in Chapters 3 and 4 of my book *Principles for Dealing with the [Changing World Order](../Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Principles%20Part%20II.md)* (which looked at the rises and declines of the world’s reserve [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) markets over the last 500 years and 750 currencies since 1700), in this study, I am going to get much more granular in explaining the last and most dramatic breakdown part of the cycle that leads to changes in [currency](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) orders.

\[2\] The “fractional reserve [banking system](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%203-%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Loan%20Monitoring%20,%20Intro%20to%20Bankruptcy%20and%20Debt%20Restructuring/Class%20Slide%203%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Monitoring.md)” can lend more money than is deposited because the same money can be lent several times.

\[3\] This cautiousness is reflected in market [pricing](../../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md). For example, during the early stages of the cycle the yields and expected [returns](../../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%203%20-%20%20Assets,%20Portfolios,%20and%20Arbitrage/Assets.md) of “risky assets” are very high relative to those of “low-risk assets.”

\[4\] This explanation of the phases differs slightly from how I have described them in my earlier writings and books, with the main difference being that I have separated linked monetary systems from fiat ones, which were previously both described as being part of MP1. I’ve made this change because I think it is important to draw a distinction between linked and fiat systems. The definitions of the other monetary policies (debt monetization, fiscal-monetary coordination) have remained the same, but the numbering is now different (i.e., MP2 has become MP3 and MP3 has become MP4).