# Bank Capital Structure  

“An essential message of the M&M Propositions as applied to [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md), in sum, is that you cannot hope to lever up a sow’s ear into a silk purse. You may think you can during good times; but you’ll give it all back and more when the bad times roll around.”  

[Merton](../../Credit%20Markets/Credit%20Markets%20Session%205.md) Miller (1995)  

# GLOSSARY OF TERMS  

Bank Capital Typically thought of as common equity. The Basel III definition of “Tier One” capital includes primarily common stock as well as some qualifying preferred stock.  

IS Bank for International Settlements, which is the coordinating body for international capital regulation.  

[Leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) Ratio In [corporate finance](../../Course%20Notes/Corporate%20Finance%20Lecture%20Notes.md), this is typically defined as the firm’s debt/total assets. In bank regulation, it is the opposite: equity/total assets.  

Capital Requirements Bank regulators require banks to hold at least some fraction of their assets as equity capital. Regulatory capital require ments additionally allow some types of nonequity claims to be counted as capital. Moreover, the measure of assets in the calculation o capital ratios is adjusted for asset risk (based on risk-weights) in the calculation of risk-based capital ratios.  

Subordinated Debt This is uninsured debt that the bank holds, that is, bonds. This debt is senior to equity (of course) but junior to deposits.  

# INTRODUCTION  

Bank [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) basically represents the bank’s choice of how to finance its balance sheet, that is, what mix of equity, subordinated debt, and deposits to use. It is an issue of central importance in any discussion of bank stability, and thus of great interest to regulators. The reason is that the bank’s [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) affects its fragility and its ability to withstand economic shocks. Banks are especially vulnerable to such shocks because they provide a variety of qualitative [asset transformation](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20I%20RELATIVE%20VALUE%20BUILDING%20BLOCKS/Chapter%201%20-%20Purpose%20and%20Structure%20of%20Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Institutions%20Transforming%20Intermediar.md) (QAT) services that expose them to risks of various sorts. These QAT services were discussed in detail in previous chapters. The risks that banks face can generate unexpected shocks that jeopardize the bank’s continued access to funding and cause failure. The higher the amount of capital in the bank’s [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md), the greater its ability to withstand these shocks. Bank capital is like “breaking distance” – the higher the bank’s capital, the longer the distance between it and economic failure, and thus the greater the time that its managers have to react to warning signs, and make decisions that enhance the odds of survival.  

If banks were uninsured entities or if their failures were not viewed as creating costly economic externalities, the bank’s [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) decision would be a “private matter,” something left to the bank’s shareholders and managers. But this is not the case. First, banks’ deposits are insured, and this means that the banks’ shareholders have been given a put option on the bank’s assets by the deposit insurer.1 This incents the bank to keep too low a level of capital (relative to what may be socially efficient) in order to increase the value of that put option. Second, bank failures are often contagious. In part because banks hold highly correlated asset portfolios, the failure of one bank can cause depositors and uninsured creditors to withdraw their funds from other banks, resulting in a [financial crisis](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md), as we discussed in the previous chapter. Thus, regulators would like to see banks keep enough capital so that individual bank failures are avoided in the first place. And if some banks do fail, regulators would like adequate capital in other banks to mitigate domino risks. For these reasons, regulators restrict the bank’s [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) to have some minimum amount of equity.  

To understand why banks choose the capital structures they do and why regulators impose capital requirements, it is important to first start asking: is there a privately optimal [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) for a bank, that is, a mix of [debt and equity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/I-%20Introduction%20to%20Financial%20Markets%20and%20Intermediation/I-%20Introduction%20to%20Financial%20Markets%20and%20Intermediation/Class%20Note%201-%20Borrower-Lender%20conflicts%20and%20implied%20agency%20problems.md) that maximizes the total value of the bank? This is, of course, the classic capital-structure question that [corporate finance](../../Course%20Notes/Corporate%20Finance%20Lecture%20Notes.md) students are familiar with. It is therefore appropriate to begin with a discussion of the applicability of the [Modigliani](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Liquidity%20Preference%20Market%20Segmentation%20and%20P.md) and Miller (1958) [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) indifference theorem to [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md). This will be done in the next section. In that section we will also discuss some common fallacies when it comes to the applicability of the M&M theorem, that is, wrong reasons that are sometimes used to say that M&M does not apply to banks. We will then move to [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) theories that violate the key assumptions of M&M to establish an optimal [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) for a bank. We will also discuss why the private optimum may involve less capital than what is socially optimal. We will then discuss some of the empirical evidence on the relation between bank capital, bank lending, and bank value.  

The chapter concludes with different ways in which capital is defined in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) and measured in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) supervision and regulation. There are many instances in which the issue of [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) differs from its treatment in [corporate finance](../../Course%20Notes/Corporate%20Finance%20Lecture%20Notes.md) theory.  

# DOES THE M&M THEOREM APPLY TO BANKS? DISPELLING SOME FALLACIES  

In his 1995 paper titled, “Do the M&M propositions apply to banks?” [Merton](../../Credit%20Markets/Credit%20Markets%20Session%205.md) Miller provided a two-word Abstract: “Yes and no.” He begins that paper by expressing the popular view of bankers that equity capital in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) is so expensive that asking banks to raise capital to meet higher capital requirements would reduce shareholder value in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) and reduce bank lending. His view of this issue is succinctly summarized in the opening paragraph of his paper2:  

“The banker sitting next to me was lamenting the profitable lending opportunities being passed up by capital constrained banks, when I broke in to ask: “Then, why don’t they raise more capital?” “They can’t,” he said, “It’s too expensive. Their stock is selling for only $50\%$ of book value.” “Book values have nothing to do with the [cost of equity](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Lecture%20Notes%20Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Week%207/Week%207-%20Cost%20of%20Capital%20Review,%20Implied%20Model,%20Private%20Firms.md) capital,” I replied. “That’s just the market’s way of saying: We gave those guys a dollar and they managed to turn it into 50 cents.”  

Miller’s overall conclusion is that there would be no harm to banks from operating with higher amounts of capital, because the (equity) cost of capital would decline in response to the additional safety provided by the higher capital. In other words, Miller’s view is that the [cost of equity](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Lecture%20Notes%20Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Week%207/Week%207-%20Cost%20of%20Capital%20Review,%20Implied%20Model,%20Private%20Firms.md) capital in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) is too high because equity capital is too low. Miller says3:  

“And indeed, people often tell me they can easily imagine a viable bank with $95\%$ deposits and $5\%$ equity, but they cannot imagine a viable bank with $5\%$ deposits and $95\%$ equity. Well, I can certainly imagine one. That seems hard only to those who think of the [cost of equity](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Lecture%20Notes%20Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Week%207/Week%207-%20Cost%20of%20Capital%20Review,%20Implied%20Model,%20Private%20Firms.md) capital as a single fixed number. But the [cost of equity](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Lecture%20Notes%20Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Week%207/Week%207-%20Cost%20of%20Capital%20Review,%20Implied%20Model,%20Private%20Firms.md) is not a fixed number; it’s a function that depends both on the risk of the firm’s earning assets and the degree of [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) in the firm’s [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md).”  

Miller also goes on to say that regulatory [deposit insurance](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Bank%20Runs%20Deposit%20Insurance%20and%20Liquidity.md) and too-big-to-fail safety nets create incentives for banks to keep inadequate capital levels, and capital requirements are necessary for regulators to protect their interests, just the way banks require their own borrowers to maintain adequate net worth.4  

There are many who disagree with Miller’s views on the subject, and it is often argued that the M&M propositions clearly do not apply to banks because they depart in so many ways from the set of assumptions that are needed for the M&M theorem to hold. While this may be true, it is nonetheless important to start with one of the foundational pillars of modern finance – the M&M [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) theorem – and then ask whether the reasons given for this theorem do not apply to banks can stand up to rigorous scrutiny. In doing so, it is important to first dispel some myths or fallacies about why capital is very expensive in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) and why the M&M theorem does not apply.5  

Myth 1: Capital is money that banks have to set aside and is therefore unavailable for lending, so an increase in bank capital requirements will reduce bank lending.  

Banks have been subject to two kinds of regulatory requirements: reserve requirements and capital requirements. A reserve requirement is essentially a [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md) requirement. It requires the bank to keep as cash (or as a deposit with the central bank) a certain fraction of its funding.6 The reserve requirement may also include an additional buffer of cash reserves that the bank voluntarily holds in order to cope with its deposit-withdrawal and refinancing (rollover) risk. Thus, the direct impact of a reserve requirement will be seen in terms of the cash the bank holds on the asset side of its balance sheet, and this cash is indeed tied up and cannot be loaned out.  

A capital requirement is entirely different. It has to do with equity as a fraction of total assets in the bank’s funding mix. Thus, the direct impact of a (binding) capital requirement will be seen on the liability side of the bank’s balance sheet in terms of how much equity capital the bank holds, and unlike cash reserves, equity capital can be directly invested in risky loans, just like any other form of financing the bank uses. That is, equity does not directly constrain the bank’s [investment](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md).  

In fact, one cannot draw arrows on the balance sheet and suggest that a particular asset was funded by a particular liability – the entire funding mix of the bank, which includes all of its equity and liabilities, is used to support its entire [asset portfolio](../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%204/The%20Barbell%20Versus%20the%20Bullet.md). In this sense, there is no difference between a bank’s equity and its debt or deposits in that all of the money gathered from these sources is used to finance the asset side of the bank’s balance sheet. Thus, equity does not reduce lending by somehow freezing up potentially loanable funds into immobility.  

Myth 2: Banks must necessarily have high [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) because deposits are a factor of production in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md).  

Banks are different from nonfinancial corporations in the sense that a large fraction of their liabilities is in the form of deposits that are an essential part of the [financial intermediation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%203-%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Loan%20Monitoring%20,%20Intro%20to%20Bankruptcy%20and%20Debt%20Restructuring/Financial%20Intermediation%20as%20Delegated%20Monitoring.md) services that banks provide, including various transactions and related services on deposits.7 So, just as milk is a factor of production in the making of cheese, deposits are a factor of production in what a bank produces. That is, deposits are both a liability and a factor input for the bank. Thus, high [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) is hard-wired by its production process, the argument goes, and an institution that is not highly levered is not really a bank.  

While superficially plausible, this reasoning is largely incorrect. Banks do provide valuable [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md) and transaction service to their depositors, and this generates profits. This is why banks are willing to invest resources in building branch networks to gather deposits, and are willing to pay premia for purchasing core deposits or branches from other banks. But these deposits and the profits they generate are not unlimited. So imagine a bank that has raised all of the core deposits as is cost-effective for the bank to do, and it now has a particular level of [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md). If one wants the bank to have more capital, all that one needs to ask the bank to do is to put as much equity on its balance sheet as is necessary to achieve the desired [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) ratio. Of course, the bank’s [investment](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) opportunities may not be large enough to fully utilize all of the capital and deposits this will cause the bank to accumulate. But in this case the bank can invest its surplus funds – those left over after its lending opportunities are exhausted – in marketable securities that have zero net present value (NPV).8 Thus, requiring more equity does not constrain deposit services, and a bank can be required to finance itself with as much equity as is deemed efficient for prudential regulation.9  

Myth 3: Deposits cost less than equity, so higher capital will decrease the value of the bank by forcing it to rely on more expensive funding.  

Ask any banker and you will be told that the interest rate the bank pays on deposits is far lower than the rate of return demanded by the bank’s shareholders. So, the argument goes, if we hold the size of the bank fixed and increase capital in the bank, the bank will be forced to replace deposits with more costly equity, thereby causing the bank’s value to decline.  

While it is true that a bank’s cost of deposits is less than its [cost of equity](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Lecture%20Notes%20Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Week%207/Week%207-%20Cost%20of%20Capital%20Review,%20Implied%20Model,%20Private%20Firms.md), this reasoning is incorrect to make the point that higher equity capital will lead to lower bank value. Consider the following example.10 Consider two banks, A and B, each with $\$100$ loan portfolios, an unlevered equity cost of capital of $10\%$ , and a cost of deposits of $5\%$ . There are no taxes. Let bank A be financed with $\$10$ in equity and $\$90$ in deposits, and bank B be financed with $\$20$ in equity and $\$80$ in deposits. Assume that each bank earns $10\%$ per year on its loans, and that this is also the appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate for valuing the loan cash flows. All cash flows are perpetual. Using the corporate finance formula that relates the bank’s unlevered and levered costs of capital, it follows that the levered equity costs of capital for banks A and B are $55\%$ and $30\%$ , respectively.11 The market values of equity for banks A and B are $\$10$ and $\$20$ , respectively. Thus, the NPV to the bank’s shareholders, measured as the market value of equity minus the book value of equity (invested capital), is $\$10-910=0$ for bank A and $\$20-\S20=0$ for bank B. Moreover, the total value of the bank in each case is $\$100$ . Shareholders like the [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) in bank A no more or no less than that in bank B.  

It also does not make any difference if the unlevered [cost of equity](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Lecture%20Notes%20Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Week%207/Week%207-%20Cost%20of%20Capital%20Review,%20Implied%20Model,%20Private%20Firms.md) in this example is the same as the loan interest rate; the same conclusion is reached if the loan yield is assumed to be higher, for example.  

The key error made by those who assert this myth to be true is that they fail to recognize that the infusion of equity into the bank lowers the costs of all uninsured sources of financing, leaving total bank value (and the NPV to the bank’s shareholders) unchanged. That is, as we pointed out in an earlier quote by [Merton](../../Credit%20Markets/Credit%20Markets%20Session%205.md) Miller, infusing equity in the bank lowers its equity cost of capital. Of course, while we have held bank size fixed as [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) has been varied, it has also been assumed that there are no profits associated with deposits. If one were to introduce such profits (e.g., a debt tax-shield subsidy), then one would go immediately to an all-debt corner solution for optimal [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md), as in [Modigliani](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Liquidity%20Preference%20Market%20Segmentation%20and%20P.md) and Miller (1963)  This is an old insight from [corporate finance](../../Course%20Notes/Corporate%20Finance%20Lecture%20Notes.md), and it applies to all firms, not just banks. But, as indicated previously, if acquiring deposits is profitable, then one should assume that these profits are captured to the fullest and then as much equity as is desirable is added on top of it, without worrying about the thought-experiment condition of a fixed bank size.  

Myth 4: Increasing equity capital in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) will reduce the return on equity for banks, and therefore diminish shareholder value in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) and reduce bank lending.  

There are multiple claims here, so we will address each in turn. First, it is a mathematical fact that increasing the bank’s capital ratio (or reducing its [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) ratio) will reduce its return on equity (ROE) ceteris paribus. However, in a world without taxes, a reduction in ROE due to a reduction in [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) does not affect the bank’s shareholder value. The reason is that the reduction in ROE is accompanied by a reduction in the shareholders’ required rate of ROE, as the shareholders’ risk decreases as more equity is infused into the bank. The only way that an increase in capital can reduce the bank’s shareholder value is if there are taxes and, holding the size of the bank fixed, equity replaces debt. But this is the familiar debt-tax-shield argument of [Modigliani](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Liquidity%20Preference%20Market%20Segmentation%20and%20P.md) and Miller (1963)  and there is nothing special about banks as far as this argument goes. The various arguments for why all-debt [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) is not optimal when various frictions – such as the agency costs identified by Jensen and Meckling (1976) – are introduced are also well known, and apply to all firms.  

The final point is that banks will reduce lending if required to hold more capital, due to the reduction of ROE due to higher capital. Suppose the bank views $20\%$ as the ROE target it must set in order to deliver to its shareholders the rate of return they demand. With say, $4\%$ equity capital, the bank’s loan [portfolio](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) allows it to deliver this return. But if the bank is now required to hold $8\%$ capital, it will earn a lower ROE if its loan [pricing](../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md), deposit funding cost and all other variables remain unchanged. In order to regain its original ROE of $20\%$ or more, the bank will need a loan [portfolio](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) with a higher average loan interest rate. Given the same [investment](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) opportunity set as before, the only way that a bank faced with more equity in its [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) can earn the same ROE as before is to get rid of the lower-yielding part of its loan [portfolio](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md). This, in turn, reduces bank lending.  

The reasoning above is wrong.12 To see why, it is useful to return to the observation that the bank’s ROE target cannot be viewed as fixed. If its capital ratio increases from $4\%$ to $8\%$ , the rate of return that the bank’s shareholders demand will also fall below $20\%$ . In the absence of the effect of taxes, there is no reason why the bank would need to reduce lending in response to higher capital requirements. If there is any change in the bank’s lending policy, it is likely to be an increase in lending as a bank with higher capital will view itself as less vulnerable to risk and is likely to shift some of its cash into lending. Specifically, a bank with higher capital is likely to have better access to [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md) in the interbank market, which enables it to operate with lower cash reserves.  

# THE THEORIES OF BANK CAPITAL STRUCTURE  

There are two sets of theories about bank [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) and they produce very different predictions.  

# Theory 1: High Leverage in Banking is Essential  

This theory is the one that we discussed in the last chapter at length. It asserts that the sequential service constraint (or more generally, having deposit liabilities of shorter maturity than assets) associated with bank deposits leads to disciplining of the bank. This theory argues that such discipline is unavailable with equity. Hence, banks must be highly leveraged in order to have the proper market discipline and produce the [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md) that the economy requires. Since this theory acknowledges that high [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) also makes banks fragile and vulnerable to runs, a tradeoff is suggested between bank stability on the one hand and bank [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md) and lending on the other.  

# Theory 2: Banks Need to Have More Capital  

This set of theories highlights the positive aspects of bank capital. These theories fall into two groups. In the first group, are older theories that have recognized and have built on the insight of Jensen and Meckling (1976) that there is an assetsubstitution [moral hazard](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%203-%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Loan%20Monitoring%20,%20Intro%20to%20Bankruptcy%20and%20Debt%20Restructuring/Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Monitoring.md) problem in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) in that equity represents a call option on the bank’s total assets, and the value of this call option can be increased by investing in riskier assets. With sufficiently high [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md), the bank might even choose risky negative-NPV investments. To deal with this [moral hazard](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%203-%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Loan%20Monitoring%20,%20Intro%20to%20Bankruptcy%20and%20Debt%20Restructuring/Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Monitoring.md), a sufficiently high amount of capital may be needed in the bank. Numerous models have used this argument as their centerpiece.13  

The view that more tangible equity capital is needed in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) to limit excessive risk-taking by thinly capitalized banks is an idea that came into vogue in the 1980s, especially in the aftermath of the S&L crisis in the United States. This idea was at the heart of many landmark regulatory reforms, such as the Basel I Capital Accord in 1987, FIRREA in 1989, and the FDICIA in 1991.  

A second, more recent, set of theories uses a different argument to highlight the value of capital in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md). This argument is that higher capital provides stronger incentives for banks to monitor their borrowers.14 This not only improves the terms of financing and access to bank credit for borrowers, but also improves their access to nonbank sources of finance because those financiers benefit as well from the improvement in [borrower credit quality](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%202-%20Debt%20Contracts%20due%20to%20Lack%20of%20Information/Creditor%20Control%20Rights%20and%20Firm%20Investment%20Policy.md) due to the bank‘s monitoring. Moreover, bank equity capital serves not only to strengthen the bank‘s monitoring incentives, but it also enhances its [survival probability](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20I%20RELATIVE%20VALUE%20BUILDING%20BLOCKS/Chapter%207%20-%20Default%20Risk%20and%20Credit%20Derivatives/A%20Poisson%20Model%20of%20Single%20Issuer%20Default.md), and this increases the value of its relationship loans, creating a positive feedback effect that further strengthens the bank’s incentive to monitor.15  

These monitoring-based theories of bank [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) reinforce the idea of bank capital promoting [financial system](../Contemporary%20Financial%20Intermediation%20Notes.md) stability that the earlier asset-substitution-moral-hazard theories had highlighted. Unless there is a reason for bank equity capital to be more expensive than [bank debt](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%204-%20Restructuring%20Public%20Debt/Class%20Note%204%20Class%20Slide%204-Restructuring%20Debt%20Outside%20BankruptcyRestructuring%20Debt%20Outside%20Bankruptcy.md), banks should have as much bank equity capital as possible.  

Of course, [debt financing](../Contemporary%20Financial%20Intermediation%20Notes.md) provides a tax advantage to banks due to the deductibility of interest payments on debt for tax purposes, just like it does for other firms. This can create a tradeoff between the monitoring benefit of equity and the tax benefit of debt, and generate an optimal [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) for the bank. This is illustrated in the example below.  

Example 13.1   
Suppose there is a bank that can make a loan of $\$100$ at $t=0$ . The loan will repay at $t=1$ . The loan finances a project that a borrower can invest in. The borrower can choose one out of three mutually exclusive projects: G, $\mathsf{N},$ , and n, each of which requires a $\$100$ [investment](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) at $t=0$ and produces a random payoff of $t=1$ . Project G yields a payoff of $\$150$ with probability (w.p.) 0.9 and zero w.p. 0.1. Projects $\mathsf{N}$ and n both yield $\$150$ w.p. 0.6 and zero w.p. 0.4. Project $\mathsf{N}$ produces a (noncontractible) private benefit of $\$10$ for the borrower, whereas project n gives the borrower a private benefit of only $\$6$ . These private benefits can be viewed as prerequisites the borrower can consume which are associated with a given project or [cash flow](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20I%20RELATIVE%20VALUE%20BUILDING%20BLOCKS/Chapter%201%20-%20Purpose%20and%20Structure%20of%20Financial%20Markets/Preview%20of%20the%20Book.md) diversions from the project that cannot be controlled/prevented by the bank.  

The bank can monitor the borrower’s project choice at a cost of $\$6$ . This is the monetary equivalent of what may be a nonpecuniary cost of the effort involved in monitoring what project the borrower is choosing. Bank monitoring can prevent the borrower from choosing Project N, but not project n. That is, despite bank monitoring, the borrower can choose either project G or project n, and the bank would not be able to observe which project was chosen,  

The bank can raise financing for the loan with a mix of deposits and equity. Assume for simplicity, that all of the bank’s equity is “inside equity,” that is, it is provided by the bank manager who incurs the cost of monitoring the loan. Depositors cannot observe whether the bank monitored the loan.  

The riskless interest rate is $1\%$ . Everybody is [risk neutral](../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%207-Exotic%20Options%20And%20Derivative%20Pricing%20By%20Monte%20Carlo%20Simulation.md), so both shareholders and depositors require an [expected return](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%201-%20Probability%20Distributions%20of%20Returns.md) of $1\%$ . Banks are relatively scarce, so that they can charge the borrower whatever interest rate they want. The bank faces a tax rate of $30\%$ on its net income of $t=1$ . For simplicity, assume that the depositors and the borrower pay no taxes.16 Deposits are available to the bank in whatever quantity it desires as long as depositors are promised an [expected return](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%201-%20Probability%20Distributions%20of%20Returns.md) of $1\%$ . Similarly, the bank can put up as much inside equity as needed, as long as shareholders are promised an [expected return](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%201-%20Probability%20Distributions%20of%20Returns.md) of at least $1\%$ .  

What should be the bank’s [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md)?  

# Solution  

We will solve this problem in four steps.  

# Step1  

We begin by noting that only project G can be financed by a borrower seeking a $\$100$ bank loan. The reason is that project G has an expected present value of 0.9[150]/[1.01], which exceeds the initial investment of $\$100$ . That is, there is enough value in the project for it to be viably financed. As for either project $\mathsf{N}$ or ${\mathsf n},$ from the bank’s standpoint, the maximum repayment it can extract is $\$150$ , so the maximum expected present value of the loan would be  
$$
0.6\left[150\right]/\left[1.01\right]<100,
$$  

which means the present value of what the bank can receive by making the loan falls short of the initial loan.  

# Step 2  

We now solve for the borrower’s “pledgeable income”. By this we mean the maximum repayment the borrower can pledge to the bank as repayment on the loan. Let us refer to this as $\boldsymbol{L}$ Then $\boldsymbol{L}$ solves the following:  
$$
0.9\left[150-L\right]=0.6\left[150-L\right]+6
$$  

To understand Equation  13.2), note that the left-hand side (LHS) is the borrower’s expected payoff if it chooses the G project, and the right-hand side (RHS) is the borrower’s expected payoff if it chooses the n project (which the bank cannot prevent it from choosing even if it monitors). Note that the RHS includes 6, which is the borrower’s private benefit from choosing n. Any repayment obligation exceeding $\boldsymbol{L}$ will make the RHS of Equation (13.2) greater than the LHS of Equation (13.2), therefore tilting the borrower’s [preference](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%205%20-%20Modeling%20the%20Preferences%20of%20Individuals/Utility%20Indices.md) to project n over project G. We know this is not a viable financing situation since in this case there will be no bank loan forthcoming. Thus $\boldsymbol{L}$ is the maximum loan repayment or pledgeable income of the borrower. Solving Equation 13.2) yields $L=\$130$ .  

# Step 3  

We check and verify that the borrower will prefer project $\mathsf{N}$ to $\mathrm{~G~}$ if it is not monitored by the bank. That is, if the borrower is given a loan with a repayment of $\$130,$ , then its expected profit from investing in project $\mathsf{G}$ is:  
$$
0.9\left[150-130\right]=\$18,
$$  

and its expected profit from investing in Project $\mathsf{N}$ is:  
$$
0.6\left[150-130\right]+10=\$22.
$$  

So the borrower prefers project N. But we know that the bank would never finance such a project. Hence, if a bank loan is made, the bank must find it profitable to monitor the borrower.  

# Step 4  

We begin by noting that, due to the tax deductibility of payments on debt, the bank will wish to choose the maximum [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) that is consistent with satisfying the incentive compatibility and participation constraints of the problem. So, what is the maximum amount of deposits the bank can finance with, while still making it profitable for the bank to monitor the borrower? Let $D$ be this deposit level. Then to raise $D$ at $t=0$ , the bank must promise the (uninsured) depositors an amount $\mathsf{D}[1.01]/0.9$ at $t=1$ since the expected present value of this is  
$$
{\frac{0.9}{1.01}}{\left[{\frac{D\left[1.01\right]}{0.9}}\right]}=D
$$  

n writing Equation  13.3), we are taking the expected value of $D[1.01]/0.9$ by multiplying it with the repayment probability of 0.9, and then discounting it back at the riskless rate of $1\%$ for one period.  

Thus, $D$ can be obtained by solving:  
$$
0.9\Bigg[130-\frac{D\left[1.01\right]}{0.9}\Bigg]\left[1-0.3\right]-6\geq0.6\Bigg[130-D\frac{\left[1.01\right]}{0.9}\Bigg]\left[1-0.3\right]
$$  

The LHS of Equation  13.4) has the expected value of the bank’s pretax income, which is  
$$
0.9{\Bigg[}130-{\frac{D{\big[}1.01{\big]}}{0.9}}{\Bigg]},
$$  

since the borrowers repays the bank w.p. 0.9 an amount $\$130,$ and in this case the bank repays depositors $D[1.01]/0.9$ . If the borrower defaults, then by limited liability, the bank does not repay its depositors anything either. This pretax income in the state in which the borrower repays the bank is then multiplied by [1 – 0.3], where 0.3 is the tax rate, in order to arrive at the bank’s net income. From this, the monitoring cost of $\$6$ (to ensure choice of project $\mathrm{~G~}$ by the borrower) is subtracted.  

The RHS of Equation (13.4) has the bank’s net income if it does not monitor and hence project $\mathsf{N}$ is selected by the borrower. Solving Equation  13.4) as an equality yields the maximum value of $D$ as:  
$$
D=\$90.38
$$  

f $D>\$90.38$ the RHS of Equation (13.4) will exceed the LHS of Equation (13.4), and the bank will not monitor. This means that the bank’s optimal capital structure will be $\$9.62$ in equity (for a capital ratio in book value terms of $9.63\%$ ) and $\$90.38$ in deposits. The depositors receive an expected return of exactly $1\%$ . The borrower’s NPV is:  
$$
\frac{0.9\big[150-130\big]}{1.01}=\$17.82
$$  

and the bank’s shareholders enjoy an NPV of:  
$$
0.9{\bigg[}130-{\frac{90.38{\big[}1.01{\big]}}{0.9}}{\bigg]}{\big[}1-0.3{\big]}-6=\S12
$$  

This example shows how we can arrive at an optimal structure for the bank by ensuring that there is enough capital in the bank to make it in the best interest of the bank to monitor the borrower. A key aspect of the example is that deposits are uninsured and there is no possibility of a bailout of the bank by the government, so deposit [pricing](../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) accurately reflects risk. If either of these conditions is violated, the [pricing](../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) of deposits will become insensitive to the bank’s risk, and the bank’s privately optimal [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) will involve more [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md). In fact, these government safety nets may provide the best explanation for why banks are so much more highly levered than nonfinancial firms.  

While the monitoring-based theories explain how higher capital reduces the bank’s insolvency risk, research suggests that higher [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) capital may also reduce funding/[liquidity risk](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Asset%20Backed%20Commercial%20Paper%20Understanding%20the%20Risks.md) in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md). This is because better-capitalized banks face less pressure to dump assets in fire sales in order to cope with unexpectedly low profits or other shocks that deplete their net worth.17 The reason is that they have more of a capital cushion to deal with such shocks. A reduced incidence of fire sales means that there is less [liquidity risk](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Asset%20Backed%20Commercial%20Paper%20Understanding%20the%20Risks.md) in the market because it is the incidence of fire sales that causes the values of assets for banks to decline and consequently diminishes their borrowing capacity or access to [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md). Yet another advantage of higher capital in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) that has been identified by recent theories is a reduced risk of contagion arising from individual  bank failures.18  

# EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON BANK CAPITAL, BANK LENDING, AND BANK VALUE  

On the issue of the impact of bank capital on lending, the debt-discipline theories predict that higher bank capital will reduce bank lending, whereas the monitoring-based theories predict that higher capital should result in more lending. The empirical evidence seems to support the prediction of the monitoring-based theories, although calibrating these (potential) effects is challenging.  

Let us begin by briefly discussing some of the empirical evidence on how the level of capital in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) affects bank lending. In general, establishing a causal link is a daunting task due to the difficulty in achieving a meaningful segregation of [demand and supply](../../International%20Finance/China%20Foreign%20Exchange%20Reserves/Currency%20Appreciation%20and%20Depreciation.md) effects. However, there are a few papers that have employed clever identification strategies to establish causal linkage. For example, one paper examines how the depleted capital levels of Japanese banks due to the sharp decline in the Japanese [stock market](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20III%20THE%20PLAYERS/Chapter%2012%20-%20Hedge%20Fund%20Strategies/Hedge%20Fund%20Strategies.md) during 1989–1992 affected lending by the U.S. branches of these banks.19 It documents that these U.S. branches displayed significantly lower lending. Based on this and other studies, it appears that when banks experience negative [exogenous shocks](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%202%20-%20Uncertainty,%20Information,%20and%20Stochastic%20Processes/Some%20Discrete-Time%20Stochastic%20Processes.md) to their capital, they reduce their lending. This reduction in lending can jeopardize relationships banks have with their borrowers, since these relationships rely on borrowers’ continued access to bank credit. Research has shown that banks that enter a [financial crisis](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md) with more capital are able to perform their relationship lending role more effectively.20  

What about the effect of bank capital on [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md) by banks? A study that used a comprehensive measure of bank [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md) that includes both on-balance-sheet and off-balance-sheet items has documented that, for most of the dollar volume of [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md) in the United States, higher capital leads to greater [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md).21 That is, the relationship between capital and [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md) is positive for large banks, which create most of the [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md) $(81\%)$ in the U.S. economy.  

There is also empirical evidence that having higher capital strengthens the bank’s competitive position, and allows it to grow faster by gaining an edge over its lower-capital counterparts in both its deposit and loan markets. Moreover, higher capital also allows banks to gain market share during financial crises.22 Let us now turn to the relationship between bank capital and bank value. There has been surprisingly little work done on this issue. An exception is a recent study that develops a theoretical model and tests it.23 The theoretical predictions of the model are as follows: (i) total bank value and the bank’s equity capital are positively correlated in the cross-section, and (ii) the various components of bank value in an acquisitions context are also positively related to bank capital. The empirical tests of the study provide strong support for these predictions. The empirical results are consistent with the monitoring-based view of the role of bank capital that features prominently in the theory, and the results are robust to a variety of alternative explanations – growth prospects, desire to acquire toe-hold positions, the desire of capital-starved acquirers to buy capital-rich targets, market timing, pecking order, and the effect of banks with binding capital requirements.  

Thus, it appears that higher bank capital is associated with higher lending, higher [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md), and higher bank values. Nonetheless, it does appear that [financial institutions](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) seem resistant to keeping higher levels of capital, and engage in “regulatory [arbitrage](../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md)” that involves for example, engaging in activities with lower capital requirements.24 Why they may do so will be taken up in the next section.  

# WHY THEN DO BANKS DISPLAY A PREFERENCE FOR HIGH LEVERAGE?  

Our discussion in the preceding section seems to suggest that banks should voluntarily keep high levels of capital, thereby obviating the need for [regulatory capital requirements](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Case%20Study%20of%20Northern%20Rock.md). But this is not the case. As indicated earlier, not only are banks highly levered, but they seem to take advantage of every opportunity to lower the amount of equity they keep on their balance sheets. This section discusses possible reasons for this behavior.  

1. Tax Benefits: All firms benefit from using debt because interest on debt is tax deductible at the firm level, whereas dividends paid to shareholders are not. Even [Modigliani](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Liquidity%20Preference%20Market%20Segmentation%20and%20P.md) and Miller noted that this leads firms to the corner solution of an all-debt (and one share of stock) [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md). But in the case of banks, the tax advantage of debt is even more alluring because banks have competitors (e.g., credit unions) that pay no taxes. Hence, to compete more effectively with these tax-exempt competitors, banks adopt high [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) to minimize taxes.   
2. Debt Overhang: When a firm has a high level of debt, it may pass up positive-NPV projects rather than issue equity to finance them because doing so would reduce the value of equity, as most of the benefits go to the bondholders and decrease the value of equity.25 Consider the following example:  

# Example 13.2  

Suppose a firm has to repay its bondholders $\$70$ based on its past borrowing. Its current end-of-period payoff distribution is $\$100$ with probability (w.p.) 0.5 and $\$0$ w.p. 0.5. Now suppose the firm could invest $\$20$ to make its payoff $\$75$ for sure. This is a positive-NPV investment. However, the value of equity before the investment was $0.5[\S100-\S70]=\S15.$ If the shareholders put in $\$20$ in equity, the value of equity will be $\$75-\$570=\$55,$ which is lower than $\$15$ , so the shareholders will be unwilling to do it.  

f bondholders agree to reduce their repayment to $\$50$ and additionally provide the $\$20$ [investment](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) needed to achieve the $\$75$ payoff, the shareholders would be willing to make the investment of $\$20$ to achieve the sure payoff. This is because the value of equity is equal under both scenarios:  
$$
0.5[\S100-\S50]=\S75-\S50=\S25
$$  

But the bondholders’ expected payoff now declines from  
$$
0.5[\S70]=\$35
$$  

o  
$$
\$50-\$520=930
$$  

3. [Preference](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%205%20-%20Modeling%20the%20Preferences%20of%20Individuals/Utility%20Indices.md) for Return on Equity (ROE) due to Executive Compensation: Many bank executives are compensated based on ROE and on how their bank’s ROE compares with that of peer banks. In practice, the ROE target is not typically adjusted for how the bank’s capital changes over time, as long as it satisfies [regulatory capital requirements](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Case%20Study%20of%20Northern%20Rock.md) and the bank’s own target ratio. This encourages high [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md).26   
4. Government Safety Nets: As we saw earlier, the value of the [deposit insurance](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Bank%20Runs%20Deposit%20Insurance%20and%20Liquidity.md) put option is decreasing in the bank’s capital. So, if the [deposit insurance](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Bank%20Runs%20Deposit%20Insurance%20and%20Liquidity.md) premium does not charge the bank for the additional risk, then banks will have an incentive to increase their [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) to increase the value of their option. Other government safety nets like bailouts produce similar incentives.  

# BANK CAPITAL AND REGULATION  

So far we have made no distinction between bank capital and bank equity. The word “capital” points to the liability side of the bank, just like equity; it is part of the funding of the bank. At a general level, although capital is broader than equity, one similarity between them is that they both represent a cushion that creates a “breaking distance”, and hence preserves the viability and solvency of the institution for depositors. That is, capital in general provides a safety cushion for deposits.  

Nonetheless, bank capital is not equivalent to bank equity. While equity is a part of capital, some types of hybrid and subordinated debt-like funding sources are also included in some definitions of regulatory capital. The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) – the institution that coordinates the determination of capital standards for all countries that are signatories to the Basel accord – distinguishes between Core Tier 1, Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3 [sources of capital](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Financial%20Accounting-%20Class%20Notes.md). Core Tier 1 capital represents the most stringent definition of capital – it is book common equity (paid-in capital and retained earnings), that is, what any nonfinancial corporation would consider its capital (equity). It is supposed to “support losses on an on-going basis without triggering liquidation,”27 and should be unconditionally risk absorbing and permanently available to the business. Tier 1 is broader than Core Tier 1 in that certain other instruments can be included.  

All the other definitions of regulatory capital are broader in the sense that they allow more sources of the bank’s financing to count as capital and therefore compromise on the straightforward interpretation and loss-absorbing features of Core Tier 1. For example, Tier 1 also includes noncumulative, nonredeemable preferred stock, in addition to common equity. Successively higher tiers allow more and more financing sources to be included. In addition to common stock and preferred stock, Tier 2 allows for some types of hybrid (of [debt and equity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/I-%20Introduction%20to%20Financial%20Markets%20and%20Intermediation/I-%20Introduction%20to%20Financial%20Markets%20and%20Intermediation/Class%20Note%201-%20Borrower-Lender%20conflicts%20and%20implied%20agency%20problems.md)) capital instruments, and term (i.e., of sufficiently long maturity) subordinated debt, while acknowledging that “Subordinated term [debt instruments](../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%2014/Corporate%20Bonds%20and%20Loans.md) have significant deficiencies as constituents of capital in view of their fixed maturity and inability to absorb losses except in a liquidation. These deficiencies justify an additional restriction on the amount of such debt capital which is eligible for inclusion within the capital base.” Tier 3 – introduced as part of the Basel II Accord – is meant to help absorb the bank’s exposure to foreign [currency](../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) risk and [commodities](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20I%20RELATIVE%20VALUE%20BUILDING%20BLOCKS/Chapter%203%20-%20Futures%20Markets/Futures%20Not%20Subject%20to%20Cash-And-Carry.md) risk. In addition to what is included in Tier 2 capital, Tier 3 also includes some short-term subordinated debt.  

One of the justifications for these different categories is that bank regulators look at capital in two different ways. One is as a source of financing that boosts the bank’s probability of solvency. This would require more capital that is a residual claim, that is, it comes from financiers who cannot force the bank into bankruptcy. This, of course, is “real” capital, which is common equity. It is available to absorb losses without jeopardizing solvency. The other way regulators look at capital is that it should help protect the [deposit insurance](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Bank%20Runs%20Deposit%20Insurance%20and%20Liquidity.md) fund. From this vantage point, all that is needed is that capital is subordinated to deposits, which justifies the inclusion of many instruments that are junior to deposits.  

Following the 2007–2009 [financial crisis](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md), capital rules have been tightened. The crisis exposed the inadequacy of capital that was not equity in the sense that [debt financing](../Contemporary%20Financial%20Intermediation%20Notes.md) could flee the bank when solvency concerns were sufficiently elevated. In the peculiar language of rule makers, it was concluded that the “quality of capital” had to be improved, meaning that there should be more “real” capital.28  

A second aspect of [bank regulatory capital](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Lecture%20Notes%20Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Week%206/Week%206%20Assignment%20Review.md) that distinguishes it from the way one thinks about capital for nonfinancial firms is the “flexibility” that is used in the definition of assets in the denominator of the capital ratio. Unlike nonfinancial firms, for which one would simply use the book value of total net assets in the denominator to compute a capital ratio, bank capital ratios are often computed using “risk-weighted” assets. That is, “risk weights” are used to adjust the value of the assets to reflect differences in the risks of the assets. This way, a bank consumer (nonmortgage) loan may be given a $100\%$ risk weight, so $\$1$ of the asset would count as $\$1$ in the denominator, whereas some other asset, say a sovereign government bond, might be given a zero risk weight, so this asset would simply vanish from the asset base for purposes of calculating the capital ratio. While there are some highly risky assets that are given more than a $100\%$ risk weight, most assets have risk weights that fall between $0\%$ and $100\%$ , so the overall effect of risk-weighting the assets is to reduce the denominator (assets), and thereby boost the calculated capital ratio of the bank. In other words, the practical effect of computing riskbased capital is that capital ratios look better than they otherwise would. The 2007–09 [financial crisis](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md) has led to a reassessment of this practice in the sense that regulators have determined that risk-based capital ratios cannot be the only ratios that are tracked for prudential regulation. So regulators now also focus on a (complementary) capital ratio that is not based on risk-weighted assets, the so-called “[leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) ratio.” This ratio is familiar from the way we think of capital for nonfinancial firms: it is book equity capital as a fraction of total assets.  

# CONCLUSION  

This chapter has considered the issue of how banks arrive at an optimal [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md). Our starting point was whether the [Modigliani](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Liquidity%20Preference%20Market%20Segmentation%20and%20P.md) and Miller (M&M) [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) irrelevance theorem applied to banks, and if not, what assumptions of the theorem were violated. In this discussion we dispelled some common fallacies that have been commonly used (incorrectly) to argue that the M&M theorem does not apply to banks.  

Having done this, we presented two theories of bank [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) that produce opposite predictions – the debtdiscipline theory, which says that having more [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) (and hence less capital) in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) is good for promoting bank lending and [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md), and the monitoring theory which says that having more capital (and hence less [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md)) in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) is good for promoting bank lending and [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md). The empirical evidence seems to support the monitoring theory. For the most part, banks with more capital lend more, create more [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md), are more competitive, face lower insolvency and [liquidity](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md) risks, exhibit higher probabilities of surviving financial crises, and are worth more. This is good news for public policy, since more highly capitalized banks also lead to greater bank stability.  

Private incentives, however, run in the direction of maintaining low levels of capital. Even apart from [deposit insurance](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Bank%20Runs%20Deposit%20Insurance%20and%20Liquidity.md) and bailout safety-net considerations, there are tax advantages to high [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md), so as in the M&M theory with taxes, banks would wish to maximize deposit funding because this minimizes their weighted average cost of capital.29 What keeps them from going to this extreme, however, is that capital is essential to induce banks to monitor their (relationship) borrowers, so enough capital must reside in the bank’s [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) to support good lending decisions and good postlending behavior by the bank.30 That is, capital affects both the numerator (cash flows) and the denominator (cost of capital) in the value of the bank. Moreover, it is often the case that the private incentives of banks do not account for the social externalities created by the systemic fragility that results from having banks with too little capital. As we have discussed, regulators have responded to the propensity of banks to keep low capital by formulating a variety of regulatory capital ratios, some of which differ markedly from how capital ratios are thought of for non-[financial firms](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Introduction.md) in [corporate finance](../../Course%20Notes/Corporate%20Finance%20Lecture%20Notes.md). We return to these issues in the Chapters 15 and 16  

# REVIEW QUESTIONS  

1. What are the common myths related to the role of capital in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md)? Why are these myths wrong?   
2. Is the M&M [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) irrelevance theorem applicable in [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md)? Why or why not?   
3. What are the two main theories of bank [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md)? Provide an assessment of each based on empirical evidence.   
4. Why do you think banks have so much more [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) than non-[financial firms](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Introduction.md)?   
5. Suppose a bank can make a loan of $\$120$ at $t=0$ . The loan will repay at $t=1$ and it finances a project that a borrower can invest in. The borrower can choose from one of the three mutually exclusive projects: G, N, and n, each of which requires an initial investment of $\$120$ at $t=0$ and produces a random payoff at $t=1$ . Project G pays off $\$200$ w.p. 0.8 and zero w.p. 0.2. Projects N and n both yield $\$200$ w.p. 0.5 and zero w.p. 0.5. Project $\mathrm{\DeltaN}$ produces a noncontractible private  

benefit of $\$15$ for the borrower. The bank has an option to monitor the borrower’s project choice at a cost of $\$12$ . Bank monitoring, however, can only prevent the borrower from choosing Project N, and not project n.  

The bank can raise financing for the loan with a mix of deposits and equity. For simplicity, as in Example 13.1, assume that all of the bank’s equity is “inside equity.” Depositors cannot observe whether the bank monitored the loan.  

Assume the riskless interest rate is $2\%$ and that everybody in the economy is [risk neutral](../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%207-Exotic%20Options%20And%20Derivative%20Pricing%20By%20Monte%20Carlo%20Simulation.md). Banks are relatively scarce and as such they can charge the borrower whatever interest rate they want. For simplicity, assume that only the net income of banks at $t=1$ is taxed at a rate of $30\%$ . Deposits are available to the bank in whatever quantity it desires as long as depositors are promised an [expected return](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%201-%20Probability%20Distributions%20of%20Returns.md) of $2\%$ . Similarly, the bank can put up as much inside equity as needed, as long as shareholders are promised an [expected return](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%201-%20Probability%20Distributions%20of%20Returns.md) of at least $2\%$ . What should be the [capital structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) of the bank?  

# REFERENCES  

Acharya, V., Thakor, A.V., 2016. The dark side of [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md): [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md)-induced systemic risk and implications for the lender of the last resort. J. Financ. Intermed. 28, 4–21.   
Admati  A.  Hellwig  M.  2013  The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong with [Banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) and What to do About it  Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ Admati, Anat, DeMarzo, P.M., Hellwig, M.F., Pfleiderer, P., 2013. Fallacies, irrelevant facts, and myths in the discussion of capital regulation: why bank equity is not socially expensive. Working Paper, Stanford University.   
Becker, B., Opp, M., 2013. Replacing Ratings, Harvard Business School and UC-Berkeley.   
Berger  A.N.  Bouwman  C.H.S.  2013  How does capital affect bank performance during financial crises? J. Financ. Econ. 109  146–176 Berger  A.N.  Bouwman  C.H.S.  2011  Bank [liquidity creation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Banks%20and%20Liquidity%20Creation%20a%20Simple%20Exposition%20of%20the%20Diamond%20Dybvig%20Model.md)  Rev. Financ. Stud. 22  3779–3837   
Berlin  M.  2011  Can we explain banks’ capital structures  FED Philadel. Bus. Rev. Q2  1–11   
Bhattacharya  S.  Boot  A.  Thakor  A.V.  1998  The economics of bank regulation  J. Money Credit Bank. 30  745–770   
BIS, 2006. Basel II: International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised Framework – Comprehensive Version, Basel Committee on [Banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) Supervision, Bank for International Settlements (BIS).   
BIS, 2011. Basel III: A Global Regulatory Framework for More Resilient Banks and [Banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) Systems, Basel Committee on [Banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) Supervision, Bank for International Settlements (BIS) (revised).   
Bolton, P., Freixas, X., Gambacorta, L., Mistrulli, P., 2014. Relationship and Transaction Lending in a Crisis. Working Paper, Columbia University. Boot  A.  2014  Financial sector in flux  J. Money Bank. 46  129–135   
Calomiris  C.W.  Kahn  C.  1991  The role of demandable debt in structuring optimal [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) arrangements  Am. Econ. Rev. 81  497–513 Calomiris  C.W.  Wilson  B.  2004  Bank capital and [portfolio management](../../Financial%20Engineering/Fixed%20Income%20Derivatives/The%20Impact%20of%20Option%20Strategies%20in%20Financial%20%20Portfolios%20Performance.md): the 1930s “capital crunch” and the scramble to shed risk  J. Bus. 77  421–455 Calomiris  C.W.  Mason  J.R.  2003  Consequences of bank distress during the [great depression](../../International%20Finance/Bridgewater/Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md)  Am. Econ. Rev. 93  937–947   
Calomiris, C.W., Powell, A. 2001. Can emerging market bank regulators establish creditor discipline? The case of Argentina 1992–1999. In: Mishkin, F.S. (Ed.), Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, NBER, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 147–191.   
DeAngelo, H., Stulz, R., 2015. Why high [leverage](../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%206-Leverage,%20Tail%20Risk,%20Volatility%20Products.md) is optimal for banks. J. Financ. Econ. (forthcoming).   
Diamond  D.  Rajan  R.  2000  A theory of bank capital  J. Financ. 55  2431–2465   
Furlong  F.T.  Keeley  M.C.  1989  Capital regulation and bank risk taking: a note  J. Bank. Financ. 13  883–891   
Holmstrom  B.  Tirole  J.  1997  [Financial intermediation](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%203-%20Financial%20Intermediation%20and%20Delegated%20Loan%20Monitoring%20,%20Intro%20to%20Bankruptcy%20and%20Debt%20Restructuring/Financial%20Intermediation%20as%20Delegated%20Monitoring.md), loanable funds, and the real sector  Q.J. Econ. 112  663–691   
Jensen  M.C.  Meckling  W.H.  1976  A theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership structure  J. Financ. Econ. 3 Mehran  H.  Thakor  A.V.  2011  Bank capital and value in the cross-section  Rev. Financ. Stud. 24  1019–1067   
[Merton](../../Credit%20Markets/Credit%20Markets%20Session%205.md)  R.C.  1977  An analytic derivation of the cost of [deposit insurance](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Bank%20Runs%20Deposit%20Insurance%20and%20Liquidity.md) and loan guarantees: an application of modern option [pricing](../../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) theory  J. Bank. Financ. 1  3–11   
[Merton](../../Credit%20Markets/Credit%20Markets%20Session%205.md), R.C., Thakor R.T., (forthcoming). Customers and investors: a framework for understanding the evolution of [financial institutions](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md). J. Financ. Intermed.   
Mester  L.  Nakamura  L.  Renault  M.  2007  Transactions accounts and loan monitoring  Rev. Financ. Stud. 20  529–556   
Miller  M.  1995  Do the M&M propositions apply to banks? J. Bank. Financ. 19  483–489   
[Modigliani](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Liquidity%20Preference%20Market%20Segmentation%20and%20P.md)  F.  Miller  M.  1958  The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory of [investment](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md)  Am. Econ. Rev. 48  261–297   
[Modigliani](../../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Asset%20Pricing%20Theory%20Overview/Chapter%2010%20-%20The%20Economics%20of%20the%20Term%20Structure%20of%20Interest%20Rates/Liquidity%20Preference%20Market%20Segmentation%20and%20P.md)  F.  Miller  M.  1963  Corporate income taxes and the cost of capital: a correction  Am. Econ. Rev. 53  433–443   
Myers  S.C.  1977  Determinants of corporate borrowing  J. Financ. Econ. 5  147–175   
Peek S J.  Rosengren  E.S.  1997  The international transmission of financial shocks: the case of Japan  Am. Econ. Rev. 87  496–505   
Schepens, G., 2014. Taxes and Bank [Capital Structure](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md). Working Paper, Department of Financial Economics, Ghent University.   
Shleifer  A.  Vishny  R.  2011  Fire sales in finance and macroeconomics  J. Econ. Perspect. 25  29–48   
Thakor  A.V.  2014  Bank capital and [financial stability](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Bank%20Runs%20Deposit%20Insurance%20and%20Liquidity.md): an economic tradeoff or a faustian bargain? Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 6  185–223 Thakor  A.V.  2015  Lending booms, smart bankers and financial crises. Am. Econ. Rev. 105  305–309  