# The 2007–2009 Financial Crisis and Other Financial Crises  

“In its analysis of the crisis, my testimony before the [Financial Crisis](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md) Inquiry Commission drew the distinction between triggers and vulnerabilities. The triggers of the crisis were the particular events or factors that touched off the events of 2007–2009 – the proximate causes, if you will. Developments in the market for subprime mortgages were a prominent example of a trigger of the crisis. In contrast, the vulnerabilities were the structural, and more fundamental, weaknesses in the [financial system](../Contemporary%20Financial%20Intermediation%20Notes.md) and in regulation and supervision that served to propagate and amplify the initial shocks.”  

Chairman Ben Bernanke (April 13, 2012).1  

# GLOSSARY OF TERMS  

[Breaking the Buck](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Breaking%20the%20Buck.md) [Money market funds](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Breaking%20the%20Buck.md) invest in relatively safe securities and seek to maintain a stable net asset value (NAV) of $\$1$ per share. When the NAV drops below $\$1$ , it is said that the fund “broke the buck.”  

EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. This is an institution – funded by many western countries – that provides help to countries in central and Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean to make transitions to market economies.   
ECB European Central Bank   
FDIC Federal [Deposit Insurance](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%206-%20Bank%20Runs/Bank%20Runs%20Deposit%20Insurance%20and%20Liquidity.md) Corporation   
Fannie Mae Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA)   
Fire Sales The simultaneous sale of similar assets by many firms in an industry, which results in a downward price spiral.   
Freddie Mac Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (a government-sponsored enterprise for securitizing home mortgages in the United States)   
IMF International Money Fund   
LIBOR London Interbank Offer Rate, which is the average interest rate estimated by leading banks in London that they would be charged if borrowing from other banks.   
MBS [Mortgage-backed securities](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Fremont%20Financial%20Corp.%20(b).md)   
OTD Originate-to-distribute model in [securitization](../../Financial%20Engineering/10.%20Other%20Topics%20in%20Quantitative%20Finance.md), wherein a bank originates a loan to securitize it (distribute securities to others) rather than hold it on its books.   
Tail Risks Extreme risks involving large losses but very low probabilities of occurrence.  

# INTRODUCTION  

The [financial crisis](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md) of 2007–2009 is widely regarded as the worst [financial crisis](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md) since the [Great Depression](../../International%20Finance/Bridgewater/Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md) of the 1930s.2 The crisis threatened the global [financial system](../Contemporary%20Financial%20Intermediation%20Notes.md) with total collapse, led to the bailouts of many large [financial institutions](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) by their national governments, caused big declines in stock prices, followed by smaller and more expensive loans for corporate borrowers as banks pulled back from lending, and decline in consumer lending, as well as lower investments in the real sector.3 The decline in lending to consumers and corporations also caused unemployment to rise.4 In the United States, Lehman Brothers, a global 158-year old [investment](../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) bank, filed for bankruptcy, whereas Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, two huge government-sponsored enterprises that have been key players in the [securitization](../../Financial%20Engineering/10.%20Other%20Topics%20in%20Quantitative%20Finance.md) market in the United States, as well as the insurance giant AIG, were bailed out by the government, and Wachovia (the fourth largest bank in the United States) was bought out by Citigroup. In response to these events, [financial markets](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) became highly volatile, and the Dow Jones  