---
cssclasses: [international-economics]
title: Chapter 3. Labor Productivity and Comparative Advantage_ The Ricardian Model
tags: [international-economics, comparative-advantage, ricardian-model, labor-productivity]
aliases: [Ricardian Model, Comparative Advantage]
key_concepts:
  - Comparative Advantage
  - Absolute Advantage
  - Ricardian Model
  - Labor Productivity
  - Production Possibility Frontier
  - Opportunity Cost
  - Unit Labor Requirements
  - Relative Prices
linter-yaml-title-alias: Chapter 3. Labor Productivity and Comparative Advantage_ The Ricardian Model
---

# Chapter 3. Labor Productivity and Comparative Advantage: The Ricardian Model

Countries engage in international trade for two basic reasons, each of which contributes to 
their gains from trade. First, countries trade because they are different from each other. 
Nations, like individuals, can benefit from their differences by reaching an arrangement in 
which each does the things it does relatively well. Second, countries trade to achieve 
economies of scale in production. That is, if each country produces only a limited range of 
goods, it can produce each of these goods at a larger scale and hence more efficiently than if 
it tried to produce everything. In the real world, patterns of international trade reflect the 
interaction of both these motives. As a first step toward understanding the causes and effects 
of trade, however, it is useful to look at simplified models in which only one of these 
motives is present.

The next four chapters develop tools to help us to understand how differences between countries 
give rise to trade between them and why this trade is mutually beneficial. The essential 
concept in this analysis is that of comparative advantage.

Although comparative advantage is a simple concept, experience shows that it is a surprisingly 
hard concept for many people to understand (or accept). Indeed, the late Paul Samuelson—the 
Nobel laureate economist who did much to develop the models of international trade discussed 
in Chapters 4 and 5—once described comparative advantage as the best example he knew of an 
economic principle that is undeniably true yet not obvious to intelligent people.

In this chapter, we begin with a general introduction to the concept of comparative advantage 
and then proceed to develop a specific model of how comparative advantage determines the 
pattern of international trade.

## Learning Goals

After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

- Explain how the Ricardian model, the most basic model of international trade, works and how 
  it illustrates the principle of comparative advantage
- Demonstrate gains from trade and refute common fallacies about international trade
- Describe the empirical evidence that wages reflect productivity and that trade patterns 
  reflect relative productivity

## The Concept of Comparative Advantage

On Valentine's Day 1996, which happened to fall less than a week before the crucial February 
20 primary in New Hampshire, Republican presidential candidate Patrick Buchanan stopped at a 
nursery to buy a dozen roses for his wife. He took the occasion to make a speech denouncing 
the growing imports of flowers into the United States, which he claimed were putting American 
flower growers out of business. And it is indeed true that a large share of the market for 
winter roses in the United States is supplied by imports flown in from South American 
countries, Colombia in particular. But is that a bad thing?

The case of winter roses offers an excellent example of the reasons why international trade 
can be beneficial. Consider first how hard it is to supply American sweethearts with fresh 
roses in February. The flowers must be grown in heated greenhouses, at great expense in terms 
of energy, capital investment, and other scarce resources. Those resources could be used to 
produce other goods. Inevitably, there is a trade-off. In order to produce winter roses, the 
U.S. economy must produce fewer of other things, such as computers. Economists use the term 
opportunity cost to describe such trade-offs: The opportunity cost of roses in terms of 
computers is the number of computers that could have been produced with the resources used to 
produce a given number of roses.

Suppose, for example, that the United States currently grows 10 million roses for sale on 
Valentine's Day and that the resources used to grow those roses could have produced 100,000 
computers instead. Then the opportunity cost of those 10 million roses is 100,000 computers. 
(Conversely, if the computers were produced instead, the opportunity cost of those 100,000 
computers would be 10 million roses.)

Those 10 million Valentine's Day roses could instead have been grown in Colombia. It seems 
extremely likely that the opportunity cost of those roses in terms of computers would be less 
than it would be in the United States. For one thing, it is a lot easier to grow February 
roses in the Southern Hemisphere, where it is summer in February rather than winter. 
Furthermore, Colombian workers are less efficient than their U.S. counterparts at making 
technologically advanced goods such as computers, which means that a given amount of resources 
used in computer production yields fewer computers in Colombia than in the United States. So 
the trade-off in Colombia might be something like 10 million winter roses for only 30,000 
computers.

This difference in opportunity costs offers the possibility of a mutually beneficial 
rearrangement of world production. Let the United States stop growing winter roses and devote 
the resources this frees up to producing computers; meanwhile, let Colombia grow those roses 
instead, shifting the necessary resources out of its computer industry. The resulting changes 
in production would look like Table 3-1.

**Table 3-1**: Hypothetical Changes in Production

|                | Million Roses | Thousand Computers |
|----------------|---------------|-------------------|
| United States  | -10           | +100              |
| Colombia       | +10           | -30               |
| Total          | 0             | +70               |

Look what has happened: The world is producing just as many roses as before, but it is now 
producing more computers. So this rearrangement of production, with the United States 
concentrating on computers and Colombia concentrating on roses, increases the size of the 
world's economic pie. Because the world as a whole is producing more, it is possible in 
principle to raise everyone's standard of living.

### Defining Comparative Advantage

The reason that international trade produces this increase in world output is that it allows 
each country to specialize in producing the good in which it has a comparative advantage. A 
country has a comparative advantage in producing a good if the opportunity cost of producing 
that good in terms of other goods is lower in that country than it is in other countries.

In this example, Colombia has a comparative advantage in winter roses and the United States 
has a comparative advantage in computers. The standard of living can be increased in both 
places if Colombia produces roses for the U.S. market while the United States produces 
computers for the Colombian market. We therefore have an essential insight about comparative 
advantage and international trade: Trade between two countries can benefit both countries if 
each country exports the goods in which it has a comparative advantage.

This is a statement about possibilities—not about what will actually happen. In the real 
world, there is no central authority deciding which country should produce roses and which 
should produce computers. Nor is there anyone handing out roses and computers to consumers in 
both places. Instead, international production and trade are determined in the marketplace, 
where supply and demand rule. Is there any reason to suppose that the potential for mutual 
gains from trade will be realized? Will the United States and Colombia actually end up 
producing the goods in which each has a comparative advantage? Will the trade between them 
actually make both countries better off?

To answer these questions, we must be much more explicit in our analysis. In this chapter, we 
will develop a model of international trade originally proposed by British economist David 
Ricardo, who introduced the concept of comparative advantage in the early 19th century. This 
approach, in which international trade is solely due to international differences in the 
productivity of labor, is known as the Ricardian model.

## A One-Factor Economy

To introduce the role of comparative advantage in determining the pattern of international 
trade, we begin by imagining that we are dealing with an economy—which we call Home—that has 
only one factor of production. (In Chapter 4 we extend the analysis to models in which there 
are several factors.) We imagine that only two goods, wine and cheese, are produced. The 
technology of Home's economy can be summarized by labor productivity in each industry, 
expressed in terms of the unit labor requirement, the number of hours of labor required to 
produce a pound of cheese or a gallon of wine. For example, it might require one hour of 
labor to produce a pound of cheese and two hours to produce a gallon of wine. Notice, by the 
way, that we're defining unit labor requirements as the inverse of productivity—the more 
cheese or wine a worker can produce in an hour, the lower the unit labor requirement. For 
future reference, we define $a_{LW}$ and $a_{LC}$ as the unit labor requirements in wine and 
cheese production, respectively. The economy's total resources are defined as $L$, the total 
labor supply.

### Production Possibilities

Because any economy has limited resources, there are limits on what it can produce, and there 
are always trade-offs; to produce more of one good, the economy must sacrifice some production 
of another good. These trade-offs are illustrated graphically by a production possibility 
frontier (line PF in Figure 3-1), which shows the maximum amount of wine that can be produced 
once the decision has been made to produce any given amount of cheese, and vice versa.

When there is only one factor of production, the production possibility frontier of an economy 
is simply a straight line. We can derive this line as follows: If $Q_W$ is the economy's 
production of wine and $Q_C$ its production of cheese, then the labor used in producing wine 
will be $a_{LW}Q_W$, and the labor used in producing cheese will be $a_{LC}Q_C$. The 
production possibility frontier is determined by the limits on the economy's resources—in this 
case, labor. Because the economy's total labor supply is $L$, the limits on production are 
defined by the inequality:

$$a_{LC}Q_C + a_{LW}Q_W \leq L$$

Suppose, for example, that the economy's total labor supply is 1,000 hours and that it takes 
one hour of labor to produce a pound of cheese and two hours of labor to produce a gallon of 
wine. Then the total labor used in production is (1 × pounds of cheese produced) + (2 × 
gallons of wine produced), and this total must be no more than the 1,000 hours of labor 
available. If the economy devoted all its labor to cheese production, it could, as shown in 
Figure 3-1, produce $L/a_{LC}$ pounds of cheese (1,000 pounds). If it devoted all its labor 
to wine production instead, it could produce $L/a_{LW}$ gallons—1,000/2 = 500 gallons—of 
wine. And it can produce any mix of wine and cheese that lies on the straight line connecting 
those two extremes.

![Figure 3-1](000bbe05e2330bb16165dcbcb1259d9fac91309a8eee8a4cc383820792a4b131.jpg)

**Figure 3-1:** Home's Production Possibility Frontier

*The line PF shows the maximum amount of cheese Home can produce given any production of wine, 
and vice versa.*

When the production possibility frontier is a straight line, the opportunity cost of a pound 
of cheese in terms of wine is constant. As we saw in the previous section, this opportunity 
cost is defined as the number of gallons of wine the economy would have to give up in order 
to produce an extra pound of cheese. In this case, to produce another pound would require 
$a_{LC}$ person-hours. Each of these person-hours could in turn have been used to produce 
$1/a_{LW}$ gallons of wine. Thus, the opportunity cost of cheese in terms of wine is 
$a_{LC}/a_{LW}$. For example, if it takes one person-hour to make a pound of cheese and two 
hours to produce a gallon of wine, the opportunity cost of each pound of cheese is half a 
gallon of wine. As Figure 3-1 shows, this opportunity cost is equal to the absolute value of 
the slope of the production possibility frontier.

### Relative Prices and Supply

The production possibility frontier illustrates the different mixes of goods the economy can 
produce. To determine what the economy will actually produce, however, we need to look at 
prices. Specifically, we need to know the relative price of the economy's two goods, that is, 
the price of one good in terms of the other.

In a competitive economy, supply decisions are determined by the attempts of individuals to 
maximize their earnings. In our simplified economy, since labor is the only factor of 
production, the supply of cheese and wine will be determined by the movement of labor to 
whichever sector pays the higher wage.

Suppose, once again, that it takes one hour of labor to produce a pound of cheese and two 
hours to produce a gallon of wine. Now suppose further that cheese sells for $4 a pound while 
wine sells for $7 a gallon. What will workers produce? Well, if they produce cheese, they can 
earn $4 an hour. (Bear in mind that since labor is the only input into production here, there 
are no profits, so workers receive the full value of their output.) On the other hand, if 
workers produce wine, they will earn only $3.50 an hour, because a $7 gallon of wine takes 
two hours to produce. So if cheese sells for $4 a pound while wine sells for $7 a gallon, 
workers will do better by producing cheese—and the economy as a whole will specialize in 
cheese production.

But what if cheese prices drop to $3 a pound? In that case, workers can earn more by 
producing wine, and the economy will specialize in wine production instead.

More generally, let $P_C$ and $P_W$ be the prices of cheese and wine, respectively. It takes 
$a_{LC}$ person-hours to produce a pound of cheese; since there are no profits in our 
one-factor model, the hourly wage in the cheese sector will equal the value of what a worker 
can produce in an hour, $P_C/a_{LC}$. Since it takes $a_{LW}$ person-hours to produce a 
gallon of wine, the hourly wage rate in the wine sector will be $P_W/a_{LW}$. Wages in the 
cheese sector will be higher if $P_C/P_W > a_{LC}/a_{LW}$; wages in the wine sector will be 
higher if $P_C/P_W < a_{LC}/a_{LW}$. Because everyone will want to work in whichever industry 
offers the higher wage, the economy will specialize in the production of cheese if $P_C/P_W > 
a_{LC}/a_{LW}$. On the other hand, it will specialize in the production of wine if $P_C/P_W < 
a_{LC}/a_{LW}$. Only when $P_C/P_W$ is equal to $a_{LC}/a_{LW}$ will both goods be produced.

What is the significance of the number $a_{LC}/a_{LW}$? We saw in the previous section that 
it is the opportunity cost of cheese in terms of wine. We have therefore just derived a 
crucial proposition about the relationship between prices and production: The economy will 
specialize in the production of cheese if the relative price of cheese exceeds its opportunity 
cost in terms of wine; it will specialize in the production of wine if the relative price of 
cheese is less than its opportunity cost in terms of wine.

In the absence of international trade, Home would have to produce both goods for itself. But 
it will produce both goods only if the relative price of cheese is just equal to its 
opportunity cost. Since opportunity cost equals the ratio of unit labor requirements in cheese 
and wine, we can summarize the determination of prices in the absence of international trade 
with a simple labor theory of value: In the absence of international trade, the relative 
prices of goods are equal to their relative unit labor requirements.

## Trade in a One-Factor World

To describe the pattern and effects of trade between two countries when each country has only 
one factor of production is simple. Yet the implications of this analysis can be surprising. 
Indeed, to those who have not thought about international trade, many of these implications 
seem to conflict with common sense. Even this simplest of trade models can offer some 
important guidance on real-world issues, such as what constitutes fair international 
competition and fair international exchange.

Before we get to these issues, however, let us get the model stated. Suppose there are two 
countries. One of them we again call Home and the other we call Foreign. Each of these 
countries has one factor of production (labor) and can produce two goods, wine and cheese. As 
before, we denote Home's labor force by $L$ and Home's unit labor requirements in wine and 
cheese production by $a_{LW}$ and $a_{LC}$, respectively. For Foreign, we will use a 
convenient notation throughout this text: When we refer to some aspect of Foreign, we will use 
the same symbol that we use for Home, but with an asterisk. Thus Foreign's labor force will 
be denoted by $L^*$, Foreign's unit labor requirements in wine and cheese will be denoted by 
$a_{LW}^*$ and $a_{LC}^*$, respectively, and so on.

In general, the unit labor requirements can follow any pattern. For example, Home could be 
less productive than Foreign in wine but more productive in cheese, or vice versa. For the 
moment, we make only one arbitrary assumption: that

$$\frac{a_{LC}}{a_{LW}} < \frac{a_{LC}^*}{a_{LW}^*}$$

or, equivalently, that

$$\frac{a_{LC}}{a_{LC}^*} < \frac{a_{LW}}{a_{LW}^*}$$

In words, we are assuming that the ratio of the labor required to produce a pound of cheese to 
that required to produce a gallon of wine is lower in Home than it is in Foreign. More briefly 
still, we are saying that Home's relative productivity in cheese is higher than it is in wine.

But remember that the ratio of unit labor requirements is equal to the opportunity cost of 
cheese in terms of wine; and remember also that we defined comparative advantage precisely in 
terms of such opportunity costs. So the assumption about relative productivities embodied in 
equations (3-2) and (3-3) amounts to saying that Home has a comparative advantage in cheese.

### Absolute Advantage versus Comparative Advantage

One point should be noted immediately: The condition under which Home has this comparative 
advantage involves all four unit labor requirements, not just two. You might think that to 
determine who will produce cheese, all you need to do is compare the two countries' unit 
labor requirements in cheese production, $a_{LC}$ and $a_{LC}^*$. If $a_{LC} < a_{LC}^*$, 
Home labor is more efficient than Foreign in producing cheese. When one country can produce a 
unit of a good with less labor than another country, we say that the first country has an 
absolute advantage in producing that good. In our example, Home has an absolute advantage in 
producing cheese.

What we will see in a moment, however, is that we cannot determine the pattern of trade from 
absolute advantage alone. One of the most important sources of error in discussing 
international trade is to confuse comparative advantage with absolute advantage.

![Figure 3-2](6e3fdf615705eca89a0cf5ddc403e0539a915b677c177e694c5c0748dd26ec85.jpg)

**Figure 3-2:** Foreign's Production Possibility Frontier

*Because Foreign's relative unit labor requirement in cheese is higher than Home's (it needs 
to give up many more units of wine to produce one more unit of cheese), its production 
possibility frontier is steeper.*

Given the labor forces and the unit labor requirements in the two countries, we can draw the 
production possibility frontier for each country. We have already done this for Home, by 
drawing PF in Figure 3-1. The production possibility frontier for Foreign is shown as $P^*F^*$ 
in Figure 3-2. Since the slope of the production possibility frontier equals the opportunity 
cost of cheese in terms of wine, Foreign's frontier is steeper than Home's. In the absence of 
trade, the relative prices of cheese and wine in each country would be determined by the 
relative unit labor requirements. Thus, in Home the relative price of cheese would be 
$a_{LC}/a_{LW}$; in Foreign it would be $a_{LC}^*/a_{LW}^*$.

Once we allow for the possibility of international trade, however, prices will no longer be 
determined purely by domestic considerations. If the relative price of cheese is higher in 
Foreign than in Home, it will be profitable to ship cheese from Home to Foreign and to ship 
wine from Foreign to Home. This cannot go on indefinitely, however. Eventually, Home will 
export enough cheese and Foreign enough wine to equalize the relative price. But what 
determines the level at which that price settles?

### Determining the Relative Price after Trade

Prices of internationally traded goods, like other prices, are determined by supply and 
demand. In discussing comparative advantage, however, we must apply supply-and-demand analysis 
carefully. In some contexts, such as some of the trade policy analysis in Chapters 9 through 
12, it is acceptable to focus only on supply and demand in a single market. In assessing the 
effects of U.S. import quotas on sugar, for example, it is reasonable to use partial 
equilibrium analysis, that is, to study a single market, the sugar market. When we study 
comparative advantage, however, it is crucial to keep track of the relationships between 
markets (in our example, the markets for wine and cheese). Since Home exports cheese only in 
return for imports of wine and Foreign exports wine in return for cheese, it can be misleading 
to look at the cheese and wine markets in isolation. What is needed is general equilibrium 
analysis, which takes account of the linkages between the two markets.

![Figure 3-3](e1ebb3959efd31937274146c2e8f91880afa1e5ab85087880d32360eede6fb8e.jpg)

**Figure 3-3:** World Relative Supply and Demand

*The RD and RD' curves show that the demand for cheese relative to wine is a decreasing 
function of the price of cheese relative to that of wine, while the RS curve shows that the 
supply of cheese relative to wine is an increasing function of the same relative price.*

One useful way to keep track of two markets at once is to focus not just on the quantities of 
cheese and wine supplied and demanded but also on the relative supply and demand, that is, on 
the number of pounds of cheese supplied or demanded divided by the number of gallons of wine 
supplied or demanded.

Figure 3-3 shows world supply and demand for cheese relative to wine as functions of the price 
of cheese relative to that of wine. The relative demand curve is indicated by RD; the relative 
supply curve is indicated by RS. World general equilibrium requires that relative supply equal 
relative demand, and thus the world relative price is determined by the intersection of RD and 
RS.

### The Relative Supply Curve

The striking feature of Figure 3-3 is the funny shape of the relative supply curve RS: It's a 
"step" with flat sections linked by a vertical section. Once we understand the derivation of 
the RS curve, we will be almost home-free in understanding the whole model.

First, as drawn, the RS curve shows that there would be no supply of cheese if the world price 
dropped below $a_{LC}/a_{LW}$. To see why, recall that we showed that Home will specialize in 
the production of wine whenever $P_C/P_W < a_{LC}/a_{LW}$. Similarly, Foreign will specialize 
in wine production whenever $P_C/P_W < a_{LC}^*/a_{LW}^*$. At the start of our discussion of 
equation (3-2), we made the assumption that $a_{LC}/a_{LW} < a_{LC}^*/a_{LW}^*$. So at 
relative prices of cheese below $a_{LC}/a_{LW}$, there would be no world cheese production.

Next, when the relative price of cheese $P_C/P_W$ is exactly $a_{LC}/a_{LW}$, we know that 
workers in Home can earn exactly the same amount making either cheese or wine. So Home will 
be willing to supply any relative amount of the two goods, producing a flat section to the 
supply curve.

We have already seen that if $P_C/P_W$ is above $a_{LC}/a_{LW}$, Home will specialize in the 
production of cheese. As long as $P_C/P_W < a_{LC}^*/a_{LW}^*$, however, Foreign will continue 
to specialize in producing wine. When Home specializes in cheese production, it produces 
$L/a_{LC}$ pounds. Similarly, when Foreign specializes in wine, it produces $L^*/a_{LW}^*$ 
gallons. So for any relative price of cheese between $a_{LC}/a_{LW}$ and $a_{LC}^*/a_{LW}^*$, 
the relative supply of cheese is

$$(L/a_{LC})/(L^*/a_{LW}^*)$$

At $P_C/P_W = a_{LC}^*/a_{LW}^*$, we know that Foreign workers are indifferent between 
producing cheese and wine. Thus, here we again have a flat section of the supply curve.

Finally, for $P_C/P_W > a_{LC}^*/a_{LW}^*$, both Home and Foreign will specialize in cheese 
production. Because no wine is being produced, the relative supply of cheese will become 
infinite.

### The Relative Demand Curve

The relative demand curve RD does not require such exhaustive analysis. The downward slope of 
RD reflects substitution effects. As the relative price of cheese rises, consumers will buy 
less cheese and more wine, so the relative demand for cheese falls.

### The Equilibrium Relative Price

The intersection of the relative supply and relative demand curves determines the equilibrium 
relative price after trade, denoted (P_C/P_W)^1 in Figure 3-3. Given the prices of cheese 
and wine in the two countries that would prevail in the absence of trade, we can be sure that 
the relative price of cheese after trade lies between the two relative prices that would have 
prevailed without trade. That is,

$$\frac{a_{LC}}{a_{LW}} < \left(\frac{P_C}{P_W}\right)^1 < \frac{a_{LC}^*}{a_{LW}^*}$$

To see that this must be true, we need only consider what would happen if it were not. If the 
relative price of cheese after trade were equal to its relative price before trade in Home, 
then Home producers would be indifferent between producing cheese and wine. At the same time, 
Foreign producers would have an incentive to produce only wine. But then where would the 
cheese that the world consumes come from? A similar problem arises if the relative price of 
cheese after trade is equal to its pre-trade relative price in Foreign.

It should therefore be clear that the equilibrium relative price must lie between the pre-trade 
relative prices. Furthermore, as long as the equilibrium relative price lies between the 
pre-trade prices, workers in each country will specialize in the production of that good in 
which their country has a comparative advantage. So with trade, Home produces only cheese, and 
Foreign produces only wine.

## Gains from Trade

We have now seen that countries whose relative labor productivities differ across industries 
will specialize in the production of different goods. We next show that both countries derive 
gains from this specialization. This mutual gain can be demonstrated in two ways.

The first way to show that specialization and trade are beneficial is to think of trade as an 
indirect method of production. Home could produce wine directly, but trade with Foreign allows 
it to "produce" wine by producing cheese and then trading the cheese for wine. This indirect 
method of producing wine is a more efficient method than direct production.

Consider the following example. In the absence of trade, 1 hour of labor in Home can produce 
either $1/a_{LC}$ pounds of cheese or $1/a_{LW}$ gallons of wine. But with trade, Home can 
use 1 hour of labor to produce $1/a_{LC}$ pounds of cheese, sell this cheese to Foreign, and 
buy wine in return. The quantity of wine Home gets in return depends on the relative price of 
cheese that prevails with trade. But as long as the relative price of cheese is higher with 
trade than it would have been without trade—which it will be if pre-trade relative prices 
differ in the two countries, so that

$$\frac{a_{LC}}{a_{LW}} < \left(\frac{P_C}{P_W}\right)^1$$

—trade allows Home to use 1 hour of labor to obtain more wine than it could have produced on 
its own. In other words, trade allows Home to use its labor more efficiently. The same is true 
for Foreign.

Another way to see the mutual gains from trade is to consider the change in the consumption 
possibilities of each country.

### Gains for Home

When countries do not trade, the production possibility frontier is also the consumption 
possibility frontier. Trade relaxes this constraint, allowing each country to consume outside 
its production possibility frontier.

Figure 3-4 illustrates the gains from trade for Home. Before trade, Home could produce and 
consume at any point on its production possibility frontier. For example, it could have 
produced and consumed at point F. With trade, Home specializes in cheese production, 
producing at point P. Home can then trade cheese for wine at the prevailing world relative 
price. The consumption possibilities are now given by a line through P with a slope of 
−$(P_C/P_W)^1$. Since the relative price of cheese has risen compared to its autarky level, 
this line is flatter than the production possibility frontier, allowing Home to consume at 
points like C that were previously unattainable.

The key point is that Home's consumption possibility frontier expands with trade. Trade allows 
Home to consume more of both goods than it could produce in isolation, demonstrating the 
gains from trade.

### The Pattern of Trade

Our analysis has established several key points about the pattern of trade:

1. The pattern of trade is determined by comparative advantage.
2. Countries export goods in which they have a comparative advantage and import goods in which 
   they have a comparative disadvantage.
3. Comparative advantage is determined by relative labor productivities, not absolute labor 
   productivities.
4. Trade benefits both countries by allowing them to specialize according to their comparative 
   advantages.

### Relative Wages

An interesting implication of our model concerns the relative wages between the two countries. 
Since only one good is produced in each country with trade, we can determine wages easily.

In Home, workers produce only cheese. The value of a worker's output per hour is $P_C/a_{LC}$, 
which is also the hourly wage. Similarly, in Foreign, workers produce only wine, so the 
hourly wage is $P_W^*/a_{LW}^*$.

The relative wage of Home workers in terms of Foreign workers is:

$$\frac{w}{w^*} = \frac{P_C/a_{LC}}{P_W^*/a_{LW}^*} = \frac{P_C}{P_W^*} \cdot \frac{a_{LW}^*}{a_{LC}}$$

Since $P_C = P_C^*$ and $P_W = P_W^*$ (prices equalize with trade), this simplifies to:

$$\frac{w}{w^*} = \frac{P_C/P_W}{1} \cdot \frac{a_{LW}^*}{a_{LC}}$$

Now, recall that the equilibrium relative price lies between the autarky relative prices:

$$\frac{a_{LC}}{a_{LW}} < \frac{P_C}{P_W} < \frac{a_{LC}^*}{a_{LW}^*}$$

This implies that:

$$\frac{a_{LC}^*/a_{LC}}{a_{LW}^*/a_{LW}} < \frac{w}{w^*} < 1$$

In other words, the relative wage in Home is higher than would be implied by relative 
productivity in cheese, but lower than would be implied by equal wages across countries. This 
result has two important implications:

1. Despite having an absolute disadvantage in producing both goods, Foreign can still compete 
   in wine production because its wages are sufficiently low.
2. Despite having an absolute advantage in both goods, Home's wages are not arbitrarily high—
   they are limited by productivity differences and international competition.

## Common Misconceptions about Comparative Advantage

The principle of comparative advantage and its implications are often misunderstood. Let's 
address some common misconceptions:

### Misconception 1: Absolute Advantage Determines Trade Patterns

Many people believe that countries export goods in which they have an absolute advantage (can 
produce more efficiently than other countries) and import goods in which they have an absolute 
disadvantage. This is incorrect. As we've seen, it's comparative advantage—relative 
efficiency—that determines trade patterns.

A country can have an absolute advantage in all goods yet still benefit from specializing 
according to comparative advantage. Conversely, a country can have an absolute disadvantage in 
all goods yet still have a comparative advantage in some goods.

### Misconception 2: Trade is a Zero-Sum Game

Another common misconception is that if one country gains from trade, the other must lose. Our 
analysis clearly shows this is false. Both countries gain from trade because it allows them to 
specialize according to their comparative advantages, expanding their consumption possibilities.

### Misconception 3: Low-Wage Countries Undercut High-Wage Countries

Some argue that high-wage countries cannot compete with low-wage countries in international 
trade. This "pauper labor" argument fails to recognize that wages reflect productivity. 
Low-wage countries have low wages precisely because their productivity is low. As we showed, 
relative wages adjust to ensure that each country maintains competitiveness in the goods in 
which it has a comparative advantage.

## Extending the Model

While the Ricardian model provides crucial insights, it has several limitations that should be 
acknowledged:

1. **Single Factor of Production**: The model assumes labor is the only factor of production, 
   ignoring the roles of capital, land, and other resources.

2. **Constant Returns to Scale**: The model assumes constant returns to scale, meaning that 
   doubling inputs doubles output. In reality, increasing or decreasing returns may apply.

3. **No Transportation Costs**: The model ignores transportation costs and other trade 
   barriers that can affect trade patterns.

4. **Complete Specialization**: The model predicts complete specialization, which is rarely 
   observed in practice. Countries typically produce a variety of goods.

5. **Static Analysis**: The model is static and doesn't consider how comparative advantages 
   might change over time due to technological progress or capital accumulation.

Despite these limitations, the Ricardian model remains foundational to our understanding of 
international trade. Its key insight—that differences in relative productivity create 
opportunities for mutually beneficial trade—remains valid even in more complex models.

## Empirical Evidence

How well does the Ricardian model explain actual trade patterns? Several empirical studies 
have tested the model's predictions:

### The MacDougall Test

One of the first systematic tests was conducted by G.D.A. MacDougall in 1951. He compared U.S. 
and British exports to third countries, reasoning that the U.S. would dominate in industries 
where its relative labor productivity was high compared to relative wages.

MacDougall found a strong positive correlation between relative labor productivity and export 
performance, supporting the Ricardian model's predictions.

### Modern Tests

More recent studies have continued to find support for the Ricardian model:

1. **Productivity and Trade Patterns**: Studies consistently find that countries tend to export 
   goods in industries where their productivity is relatively high.

2. **Wages and Productivity**: Cross-country comparisons show that wages are indeed closely 
   related to productivity levels, as the model predicts.

3. **The Chain of Comparative Advantage**: When examining trade patterns among many countries 
   and goods, researchers find evidence of a "chain" of comparative advantage consistent with 
   Ricardian predictions.

While the Ricardian model is too simple to explain all aspects of international trade, its 
central insights about comparative advantage and the gains from trade remain empirically valid 
and theoretically important.

## Summary

The Ricardian model demonstrates several fundamental principles of international trade:

1. **Comparative Advantage**: Countries benefit from trade by specializing in goods where they 
   have a comparative (not absolute) advantage.

2. **Mutual Gains**: Trade benefits all participating countries by expanding their consumption 
   possibilities beyond their production possibilities.

3. **Price Convergence**: Trade leads to convergence in relative prices across countries.

4. **Wage Differences**: International wage differences reflect productivity differences, 
   allowing countries with absolute disadvantages to remain competitive in some goods.

5. **Pattern of Trade**: The pattern of trade is determined by comparative advantages, which in 
   turn depend on relative productivity differences across industries and countries.

These insights from the simple Ricardian model remain relevant even as we move to more complex 
models of international trade in subsequent chapters.