---
cssclasses: [international-economics]
title: Chapter 2. World Trade_ An Overview
tags: [international-economics, world-trade, gravity-model, trade-patterns]
aliases: [World Trade Overview]
key_concepts:
  - Gravity Model
  - Size Matters in Trade
  - Distance and Trade
  - Trade Impediments
  - Trade Agreements
  - Border Effects
linter-yaml-title-alias: Chapter 2. World Trade_ An Overview
---

# Chapter 2. World Trade: An Overview

In 2019, the world produced goods and services worth about $88 trillion at current prices. 
Of this total, about 25 percent, or around $22 trillion, was sold across national borders. This 
represents a lot of exporting and importing.

In later chapters, we'll analyze why countries sell much of what they produce to other 
countries and why they purchase much of what they consume from other countries. We'll also 
examine the benefits and costs of international trade and the motivations for and effects of 
government policies that restrict or encourage trade.

Before we get to all that, however, let's begin by describing who trades with whom. An 
empirical relationship known as the gravity model helps to make sense of the value of trade 
between any pair of countries and sheds light on the impediments that continue to limit 
international trade even in today's global economy.

We'll then turn to the changing structure of world trade. As we'll see, recent decades have 
been marked by a large increase in the share of world output sold internationally, by a shift 
in the world's economic center of gravity toward Asia, and by major changes in the types of 
goods that make up that trade.

## Learning Goals

After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

- Describe how the value of trade between any two countries depends on the size of these 
  countries' economies and explain the reasons for that relationship
- Discuss how distance and borders reduce trade
- Describe how the share of international production that is traded has fluctuated over time 
  and why there have been two ages of globalization
- Explain how the mix of goods and services that are traded internationally has changed over 
  time

## Who Trades with Whom?

Figure 2-1 shows the total value of trade in goods—exports plus imports—between the United 
States and its top 15 trading partners in 2019. (Data on trade in services are less well 
broken down by trading partner; we'll talk about the rising importance of trade in services, 
and the issues raised by that trade, later in this chapter.) Taken together, these 15 
countries accounted for 75 percent of the value of U.S. trade in that year.

![Figure 2-1](8ecfa9af948aa138871bbf5ecf1af6841c4eb46a0e8415d14e24aeb3b3ba54d4.jpg)

**Figure 2-1:** Total U.S. Trade with Major Partners, 2019

*U.S. trade—measured as the sum of imports and exports—is mostly with 15 major partners.*

*Source: U.S. Department of Commerce.*

Why did the United States trade so much with these countries? Let's look at the factors that, 
in practice, determine who trades with whom.

## Size Matters: The Gravity Model

Three of the top 15 U.S. trading partners are European nations: Germany, the United Kingdom, 
and France. Why does the United States trade more heavily with these three European countries 
than with others? The answer is that these are the three largest European economies. That is, 
they have the highest values of gross domestic product (GDP), which measures the total value 
of all goods and services produced in an economy. There is a strong empirical relationship 
between the size of a country's economy and the volume of both its imports and its exports.

Figure 2-2 illustrates this relationship by showing the correspondence between the size of 
different European economies—specifically, America's 10 most important Western European trading 
partners in 2019—and those countries' trade with the United States in that year. On the 
horizontal axis is each country's GDP, expressed as a percentage of the total GDP of the 
European Union; on the vertical axis is each country's share of the total trade of the United 
States with the EU. As you can see, the scatter of points is clustered around the dotted 
45-degree line—that is, each country's share of U.S. trade with Europe was roughly equal to 
that country's share of Western European GDP. Germany has a large economy, accounting for 20 
percent of Western European GDP; it also accounts for 24 percent of U.S. trade with the 
region. Sweden has a much smaller economy, accounting for only 3.2 percent of European GDP; 
correspondingly, it accounts for only 2.3 percent of U.S.–Europe trade.

![Figure 2-2](e9cf5828425bc64ae27c58c7c24feefa0d5c7cb90e7fb295b33e9dc0c7ae9f65.jpg)

**Figure 2-2:** The Size of European Economies and the Value of Their Trade with the United 
States

*Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, European Commission.*

### The Gravity Model Equation

Looking at world trade as a whole, economists have found that an equation of the following 
form predicts the volume of trade between any two countries fairly accurately:

$$T_{ij} = A \times Y_i \times Y_j / D_{ij}$$

where $A$ is a constant term, $T_{ij}$ is the value of trade between country $i$ and country 
$j$, $Y_i$ is country $i$'s GDP, $Y_j$ is country $j$'s GDP, and $D_{ij}$ is the distance 
between the two countries. That is, the value of trade between any two countries is proportional, 
other things equal, to the product of the two countries' GDPs and diminishes with the distance 
between the two countries.

An equation such as (2-1) is known as a gravity model of world trade. The reason for the name 
is the analogy to Newton's law of gravity: Just as the gravitational attraction between any 
two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and diminishes with distance, the 
trade between any two countries is, other things equal, proportional to the product of their 
GDPs and diminishes with distance.

Economists often estimate a somewhat more general gravity model of the following form:

$$T_{ij} = A \times Y_i^a \times Y_j^b / D_{ij}^c$$

This equation says that the three things that determine the volume of trade between two 
countries are the size of the two countries' GDPs and the distance between the countries, 
without specifically assuming that trade is proportional to the product of the two GDPs and 
inversely proportional to distance. Instead, $a$, $b$, and $c$ are chosen to fit the actual 
data as closely as possible. If $a$, $b$, and $c$ were all equal to 1, equation (2-2) would 
be the same as equation (2-1). In fact, estimates often find that (2-1) is a pretty good 
approximation.

### Why the Gravity Model Works

Why does the gravity model work? Broadly speaking, large economies tend to spend large amounts 
on imports because they have large incomes. They also tend to attract large shares of other 
countries' spending because they produce a wide range of products. So, other things equal, the 
trade between any two economies is larger—the larger is either economy.

What other things aren't equal? As we have already noted, in practice countries spend much or 
most of their income at home. The United States and the European Union each account for about 
25 percent of the world's GDP, but each attracts only about 2 percent of the other's spending. 
To make sense of actual trade flows, we need to consider the factors limiting international 
trade. Before we get there, however, let's look at an important reason why the gravity model 
is useful.

## Using the Gravity Model: Looking for Anomalies

It's clear from Figure 2-2 that a gravity model fits the data on U.S. trade with European 
countries pretty well—but not perfectly. In fact, one of the principal uses of gravity models 
is that they help us to identify anomalies in trade. Indeed, when trade between two countries 
is either much more or much less than a gravity model predicts, economists search for the 
explanation.

Looking again at Figure 2-2, we see that the Netherlands, Belgium, and Ireland trade 
considerably more with the United States than a gravity model would have predicted. Why might 
this be the case?

For Ireland, the answer lies partly in cultural affinity: Not only does Ireland share a 
language with the United States, but tens of millions of Americans are descended from Irish 
immigrants. Beyond this consideration, Ireland plays a special role as host to many U.S.-based 
corporations; we'll discuss the role of such multinational corporations in Chapter 8.

In the case of both the Netherlands and Belgium, geography and transport costs probably 
explain their large trade with the United States. Both countries are located near the mouth of 
the Rhine, Western Europe's longest river, which runs past the Ruhr, Germany's industrial 
heartland. So the Netherlands and Belgium have traditionally been the point of entry to much 
of northwestern Europe; Rotterdam in the Netherlands is the most important port in Europe, as 
measured by the tonnage handled, and Antwerp in Belgium ranks second. The large trade of 
Belgium and the Netherlands suggests, in other words, an important role of transport costs and 
geography in determining the volume of trade. The importance of these factors is clear when we 
turn to a broader example of trade data.

## Impediments to Trade: Distance, Barriers, and Borders

Figure 2-3 shows the same data as Figure 2-2—U.S. trade as a percentage of total trade with 
Western Europe versus GDP as a percentage of the region's total GDP—but adds two more 
countries: Canada and Mexico. As you can see, the two neighbors of the United States do a lot 
more trade with the United States than European economies of equal size. In fact, the Canadian 
and Mexican economies combined are only about as big as the economy of France, but they do 12 
times as much trade with the United States.

Why does the United States do so much more trade with its North American neighbors than with 
its European partners? One main reason is the simple fact that Canada and Mexico are much 
closer.

![Figure 2-3](0d85d951c3f7049f7ce483de79ff41bdd08daf6d5dc3d1fab4799203d11106b1.jpg)

**Figure 2-3:** Economic Size and Trade with the United States

*The United States does markedly more trade with its neighbors than it does with European 
economies of the same size.*

*Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, European Commission.*

### The Effect of Distance

All estimated gravity models show a strong negative effect of distance on international trade; 
typical estimates say that a 1 percent increase in the distance between two countries is 
associated with a fall of 0.7 to 1 percent in the trade between those countries. This drop 
partly reflects increased costs of transporting goods and services. Economists also believe 
that less tangible factors play a crucial role: Trade tends to be intense when countries have 
close personal contact, and this contact tends to diminish when distances are large. For 
example, it's easy for a U.S. sales representative to pay a quick visit to Toronto, but it's 
a much bigger project for that representative to go to Paris. Unless the company is based on 
the West Coast, it's an even bigger project to visit Tokyo.

### Trade Agreements

In addition to being U.S. neighbors, Canada and Mexico have long been part of a trade 
agreement with the United States, the North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA, which was 
replaced in 2020 with a slightly modified agreement, the U.S.-Mexico-Canada agreement, or 
USMCA. This agreement ensures that most goods shipped among the three countries are not 
subject to tariffs or other barriers to international trade. We'll analyze the effects of 
barriers to international trade in Chapters 8 and 9 and the role of trade agreements in 
Chapter 10. For now, let's notice that economists use gravity models as a way of assessing the 
impact of trade agreements on actual international trade: If a trade agreement is effective, 
it should lead to significantly more trade among its partners than one would otherwise predict 
given their GDPs and distances from one another.

### Border Effects

It's important to note, however, that although trade agreements often end all formal barriers 
to trade between countries, they rarely make national borders irrelevant. Even when most goods 
and services shipped across a national border pay no tariffs and face few legal restrictions, 
there is much more trade between regions of the same country than between equivalently 
situated regions in different countries. The Canadian–U.S. border is a case in point. The two 
countries are part of a free trade agreement (indeed, there was a Canadian–U.S. free trade 
agreement even before NAFTA); most Canadians speak English; and the citizens of either country 
are free to cross the border with a minimum of formalities. Yet data on the trade of 
individual Canadian provinces both with each other and with U.S. states show that, other 
things equal, there is much more trade between provinces than between provinces and U.S. 
states.

Table 2-1 illustrates the extent of the U.S.-Canadian border effect, using data from a 
detailed study of trade between Canadian provinces and U.S. states that lie along or near the 
border. The study carefully matched Canadian provinces with U.S. states that have similar 
economies and are at roughly the same distance from each other. For example, the Canadian 
province of British Columbia is similar in size to the U.S. state of Washington and is roughly 
as far from Ontario as Washington is from Ohio. Yet in 2015, British Columbia exported 3.5 
times as much to Ontario as to Washington.

Economists have used data like this to estimate that the U.S.-Canadian border reduces trade 
by a significant amount, perhaps around 40 to 50 percent. This border effect is somewhat 
puzzling. Why would the effect of a relatively open border be so large?

### The Puzzle of the Strong Border Effect

The answer to the puzzle is that the formal trade agreements don't eliminate all barriers to 
trade. Examples of the remaining barriers include the following:

- **Customs procedures**: Even though goods pay no tariffs, traders must still document what 
  they ship. These procedures can take time and may discourage smaller transactions.

- **Regulatory differences**: Canada has many regulations that differ from those in the United 
  States, for example, environmental regulations and rules for product labeling. Producers 
  must design products specially for the Canadian market, which imposes extra costs.

- **Legal differences**: Canada has a separate legal system from that of the United States, 
  which can make it difficult to enforce contracts across the border.

- **Currency differences**: Until recently, Canada used its own currency, which meant that 
  trade between the two countries involved currency conversions and the risk of exchange rate 
  changes.

- **Cultural differences**: Although Canadians and Americans share many cultural similarities, 
  there are still differences in tastes and preferences that can affect trade patterns.

Together, these factors help explain why borders continue to matter for trade even when formal 
trade barriers have been eliminated. The persistence of border effects is an important reminder 
that international trade faces many obstacles beyond explicit trade policies.

## The Changing Pattern of World Trade

World trade is a moving target. The direction and composition of trade is quite different 
today from what it was a generation ago and even more different from what it was a century 
ago. Let's look at some of the main ways in which world trade has evolved.

### Has the World Gotten Smaller?

In a sense, the world has gotten smaller over time. This isn't literally true, of course; the 
globe is the same size it has always been. But relative to the size of the world economy, the 
costs of transportation and communication have declined sharply. Jet aircraft, computers, the 
internet, and modern telecommunications have made doing business across great distances far 
less expensive than it once was. And the cost of international transactions has fallen not 
just because of transportation improvements but also because countries have reduced the 
barriers they impose on foreign trade.

Figure 2-4 shows the value of world trade as a percentage of world GDP since 1870. In the 
period from 1870 to 1913, with the end of the Civil War and the start of World War I, world 
trade grew rapidly, reaching a peak of almost 20 percent of world GDP. This was the first 
great age of globalization. The figure also shows that the share of trade in world GDP fell 
sharply during the period between the two world wars, and by 1950 was back down to about the 
level at which it started. Since 1950, however, world trade as a share of world GDP has grown 
even faster than in the first age of globalization and is now more than 25 percent of the 
world's income.

### What Do We Trade?

When countries trade, what do they trade? For the world as a whole, the main answer is that 
they ship manufactured goods, such as automobiles, computers, and clothing. However, trade in 
mineral products—oil, coal, copper ore, and so on—remains an important part of world trade.

Table 2-2 shows the percentage breakdown of world exports in 2019. Manufactured goods of one 
kind or another accounted for by far the largest share, 68.5 percent of the total. Mineral 
products—mainly oil and natural gas but also ores and coal—accounted for about 17.5 percent 
of world exports. Agricultural products accounted for only 9 percent of the total.

Is this breakdown typical? Yes, with some important qualifications. The mix of products that 
countries export depends on their resources. Saudi Arabia exports mostly oil, New Zealand 
exports mostly agricultural products, and China exports mostly manufactured goods. For the 
world as a whole, the importance of different goods in trade depends on where resources are 
located and which countries have become skilled at producing which goods.

### Services Offshoring

In addition to trade in goods, there is growing trade in services. In fact, trade in services 
accounts for about 20 percent of world trade and has been growing rapidly.

What makes trade in services possible? Technology. Modern telecommunications make it possible 
to provide many services remotely. For example:

- Customer service centers in India handle calls for U.S. companies
- Accountants in the Philippines prepare tax returns for U.S. clients
- Radiologists in Australia read X-rays for U.S. hospitals
- Engineers in Eastern Europe design software for Western firms

This phenomenon is often called services offshoring or, sometimes, "business process 
outsourcing." It's a relatively new development, but one that is growing rapidly. We'll 
discuss services offshoring in more detail in Chapter 8.

## Do Old Rules Still Apply?

It's easy to get carried away with excitement about the new global economy. One influential 
book, published in 2005, even proclaimed that The World Is Flat—that is, distance and 
geography no longer matter the way they once did.

To some extent this is true: Modern transportation and communications technology have made the 
world a smaller place. But the gravity model tells us that, even in the 21st century, distance 
still matters. And gravity models estimated on recent data find effects of distance that are 
almost as strong as estimates based on data from a generation ago.

Why hasn't technology made trade flows completely insensitive to distance? There are several 
possible answers:

1. **Face-to-face contact still matters**: Even though technology allows much communication to 
   occur remotely, many business relationships still require periodic in-person meetings.

2. **Transportation costs still exist**: While air freight and container shipping have 
   dramatically reduced transportation costs, these costs haven't fallen to zero.

3. **Time still matters**: Even with modern transportation, shipping goods takes time. The 
   longer the distance, the longer the shipping time, which can be costly for time-sensitive 
   goods.

4. **Cultural and institutional differences grow with distance**: Even in a globalized world, 
   nearby countries tend to have more in common culturally and institutionally than distant 
   countries.

In short, reports of the death of distance have been greatly exaggerated. The world may be 
flatter than it was, but it's still round.

## Summary

1. The gravity model shows that the volume of trade between two countries depends positively 
   on the size of their economies and negatively on the distance between them.

2. Trade decreases sharply with distance. This decrease reflects transportation costs but also 
   less tangible costs that increase with distance.

3. Borders have a strong negative effect on trade, even when countries have trade agreements.

4. World trade has increased substantially as a percentage of world GDP, but not in a straight 
   line. There have been two great ages of globalization, one ending in 1914 and one beginning 
   around 1950.

5. The bulk of world trade is in manufactured goods, but minerals and agricultural products 
   remain important. Service trade is growing rapidly as technology makes it possible to 
   provide many services remotely.