---
cssclasses: [international-economics]
title: Chapter 4. Specific Factors and Income Distribution
tags: [international-economics, specific-factors-model, income-distribution, short-run-effects]
aliases: [Specific Factors Model, Income Distribution]
key_concepts:
  - Specific Factors
  - Mobile Factors
  - Income Distribution
  - Short-run Effects of Trade
  - Winners and Losers from Trade
  - Diminishing Returns
  - Production Possibility Frontier
  - Factor Price Equalization
linter-yaml-title-alias: Chapter 4. Specific Factors and Income Distribution
---

# Chapter 4. Specific Factors and Income Distribution

As we saw in Chapter 3, international trade can be mutually beneficial to the economies that 
engage in it. Yet history shows that countries have often protected sectors of the economy from 
import competition. Even before the recent spurt in protectionism under the Trump 
administration (see the box in this chapter for more details), the United States limited 
imports of apparel, textiles, sugar, ethanol, and dairy products, among many other 
commodities. During presidential reelection cycles, punitive tariffs are often imposed on 
import of goods produced in key political swing states. If trade is such a good thing for the 
economy, why is there opposition to its effects? To understand the politics of trade, it is 
necessary to look at the effects of trade not just on a country as a whole but on the 
distribution of income within that country.

The Ricardian model of international trade developed in Chapter 3 illustrates the potential 
benefits from trade. In that model, trade leads to international specialization, with each 
country shifting its labor force from industries in which that labor is relatively inefficient 
to industries in which it is relatively more efficient. Because labor is the only factor of 
production in that model and it is assumed that labor can move freely from one industry to 
another, there is no possibility that individuals will be hurt by trade. The Ricardian model 
thus suggests not only that all countries gain from trade but also that every individual is 
made better off as a result of international trade because trade does not affect the 
distribution of income. In the real world, however, trade has substantial effects on the 
income distribution within each trading nation, so that in practice the benefits of trade are 
often distributed very unevenly.

There are two main reasons why international trade has strong effects on the distribution of 
income. First, resources cannot move immediately or without cost from one industry to 
another—a short-run consequence of trade. Second, industries differ in the factors of 
production they demand. A shift in the mix of goods a country produces will ordinarily reduce 
the demand for some factors of production while raising the demand for others—a long-run 
consequence of trade. For both of these reasons, international trade is not as unambiguously 
beneficial as it appeared to be in Chapter 3. While trade may benefit a nation as a whole, it 
often hurts significant groups within the country in the short run and potentially, but to a 
lesser extent, in the long run.

We describe in greater detail later in this chapter the politics of the U.S. restrictions on 
sugar imports. It is substantially more expensive to farm sugar cane in the United States than 
in tropical countries. Eliminating those restrictions would drastically lower the price of 
sugar in the United States, raising standards of living as a whole. But sugar cane farmers, 
along with corn and beet farmers (crops that are used to produce sweeteners that substitute 
for sugar cane), would be hurt by freer trade: This would lead to lower prices for their crops 
in the United States. Those farmers could switch to other crops or find jobs in other sectors, 
but those transitions would be difficult and costly. Not surprisingly, those farmers are 
vehemently opposed to removing the sugar import restrictions. And politicians representing 
those farm districts consistently vote to maintain those restrictions.

A realistic analysis of trade must go beyond the Ricardian model to models in which trade can 
affect income distribution. In this chapter, we focus on the short-run consequences of trade 
on the income distribution when factors of production cannot move without cost between 
sectors. To keep our model simple, we assume that the sector-switching cost for some factors 
is high enough that such a switch is impossible in the short run. Those factors are specific 
to a particular sector.

## Learning Goals

After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

- Understand how a mobile factor will respond to price changes by moving across sectors
- Explain why trade will generate both winners and losers in the short run
- Understand the meaning of gains from trade when there are losers
- Discuss the reasons why trade is a politically contentious issue
- Explain the arguments in favor of free trade despite the existence of losers

## The Specific Factors Model

The specific factors model was developed by Paul Samuelson and Ronald Jones. Like the simple 
Ricardian model, it assumes an economy that produces two goods and that can allocate its labor 
supply between the two sectors. Unlike the Ricardian model, however, the specific factors 
model allows for the existence of factors of production besides labor. Whereas labor is a 
mobile factor that can move between sectors, these other factors are assumed to be specific. 
That is, they can be used only in the production of particular goods.

### What Is a Specific Factor?

In the model developed in this chapter, we assume two factors of production—land and 
capital—are permanently tied to particular sectors of the economy. In advanced economies, 
however, agricultural land receives only a small part of national income. When economists 
apply the specific factors model to economies like those of the United States or France, they 
typically think of factor specificity not as a permanent condition but as a matter of time. 
For example, the vats used to brew beer and the stamping presses used to build auto bodies 
cannot be substituted for each other, and so these different kinds of equipment are 
industry-specific. Given time, however, it would be possible to redirect investment from auto 
factories to breweries or vice versa. As a result, in a long-term sense both vats and stamping 
presses can be considered two manifestations of a single, mobile factor called capital.

In practice, then, the distinction between specific and mobile factors is not a sharp line. 
Rather, it is a question of the speed of adjustment, with factors being more specific the 
longer it takes to redeploy them between industries. So how specific are the factors of 
production in the real economy?

Worker mobility varies greatly with the characteristics of the worker (such as age) and the 
job occupation (whether it requires general or job-specific skills). Nevertheless, one can 
measure an average rate of mobility by looking at the duration of unemployment following a 
worker's displacement. After four years, a displaced worker in the United States has the same 
probability of being employed as a similar worker who was not displaced. This four-year time 
span compares with a lifetime of 15 or 20 years for a typical specialized machine and 30 to 50 
years for structures (a shopping mall, office building, or production plant). So labor is 
certainly a less specific factor than most kinds of capital. However, even though most workers 
can find new employment in other sectors within a four-year time span, switching occupations 
entails additional costs: A displaced worker who is reemployed in a different occupation 
suffers an 18 percent permanent drop in wages (on average). This compares with a 6 percent 
drop if the worker does not switch occupations. Thus, labor is truly flexible only before a 
worker has invested in any occupation-specific skills.

## Assumptions of the Model

Imagine an economy that can produce two goods, cloth and food. Instead of one factor of 
production, however, the country has three: labor ($L$), capital ($K$), and land ($T$ for 
terrain). Cloth is produced using capital and labor (but not land), while food is produced 
using land and labor (but not capital). Labor is therefore a mobile factor that can be used in 
either sector, while land and capital are both specific factors that can be used only in the 
production of one good. Land can also be thought of as a different type of capital, one that 
is specific to the food sector.

How much of each good does the economy produce? The economy's output of cloth depends on how 
much capital and labor are used in that sector. This relationship is summarized by a 
production function that tells us the quantity of cloth that can be produced given any input 
of capital and labor. The production function for cloth can be summarized algebraically as

$$Q_C = Q_C(K, L_C)$$

where $Q_C$ is the economy's output of cloth, $K$ is the economy's capital stock, and $L_C$ 
is the labor force employed in cloth. Similarly, for food we can write the production 
function

$$Q_F = Q_F(T, L_F)$$

where $Q_F$ is the economy's output of food, $T$ is the economy's supply of land, and $L_F$ 
is the labor force devoted to food production. For the economy as a whole, the labor employed 
must equal the total labor supply $L$:

$$L_C + L_F = L$$

## Production Possibilities

The specific factors model assumes that each of the specific factors, capital and land, can be 
used in only one sector, cloth and food, respectively. Only labor can be used in either 
sector. Thus, to analyze the economy's production possibilities, we need only to ask how the 
economy's mix of output changes as labor is shifted from one sector to the other. This can be 
done graphically, first by representing the production functions (4-1) and (4-2) and then by 
putting them together to derive the production possibility frontier.

Figure 4-1 illustrates the relationship between labor input and output of cloth. The larger 
the input of labor for a given capital supply, the larger the output. In Figure 4-1, the 
slope of $Q_C(K, L_C)$ represents the marginal product of labor, that is, the addition to 
output generated by adding one more person-hour. However, if labor input is increased without 
increasing capital, there will normally be diminishing returns: Because adding a worker means 
that each worker has less capital to work with, each successive increment of labor will add 
less to production than the last. Diminishing returns are reflected in the shape of the 
production function: $Q_C(K, L_C)$ gets flatter as we move to the right, indicating that the 
marginal product of labor declines as more labor is used.

![Figure 4-1](519471ed2418dcb65d716f0c99103c48e3bbe5df9763a68a061c8a40d9622a00.jpg)

**Figure 4-1:** The Production Function for Cloth

*The more labor employed in the production of cloth, the larger the output. As a result of 
diminishing returns, however, each successive person-hour increases output by less than the 
previous one; this is shown by the fact that the curve relating labor input to output gets 
flatter at higher levels of employment.*

![Figure 4-2](237d467d9f23ee406c769d2cd705a332193ba0e450526b88916eaf580c0b1b01.jpg)

**Figure 4-2:** The Marginal Product of Labor

*The marginal product of labor in the cloth sector, equal to the slope of the production 
function shown in Figure 4-1, is lower the more labor the sector employs.*

Figure 4-2 shows the same information a different way. In this figure, we directly plot the 
marginal product of labor as a function of the labor employed. (In the appendix to this 
chapter, we show that the area under the marginal product curve represents the total output of 
cloth.)

A similar pair of diagrams can represent the production function for food. These diagrams can 
then be combined to derive the production possibility frontier for the economy, as illustrated 
in Figure 4-3. As we saw in Chapter 3, the production possibility frontier shows what the 
economy is capable of producing; in this case, it shows how much food it can produce for any 
given output of cloth and vice versa.

![Figure 4-3](70ed5e028c2a6ef300fb73fd03040fd61967400e8d36f1bb33246f046a9bd28d.jpg)

**Figure 4-3:** The Production Possibility Frontier in the Specific Factors Model

*Production of cloth and food is determined by the allocation of labor. In the lower-left 
quadrant, the allocation of labor between sectors can be illustrated by a point on line AA, 
which represents all combinations of labor input to cloth and food that sum up to the total 
labor supply L. Corresponding to any particular point on AA, such as point 2, is a labor input 
to cloth (L²_C) and a labor input to food (L²_F). The curves in the lower-right and upper-left 
quadrants represent the production functions for cloth and food, respectively; these allow 
determination of output (Q²_C, Q²_F) given labor input. Then in the upper-right quadrant, the 
curve PP shows how the output of the two goods varies as the allocation of labor is shifted 
from food to cloth, with the output points 1', 2', 3' corresponding to the labor allocations 
1, 2, 3. Because of diminishing returns, PP is a bowed-out curve instead of a straight line.*

### The Four-Quadrant Diagram

Figure 4-3 is a four-quadrant diagram. In the lower-right quadrant, we show the production 
function for cloth illustrated in Figure 4-1. This time, however, we turn the figure on its 
side: A movement downward along the vertical axis represents an increase in the labor input to 
the cloth sector, while a movement to the right along the horizontal axis represents an 
increase in the output of cloth. In the upper-left quadrant, we show the corresponding 
production function for food; this part of the figure is also flipped around, so that a 
movement to the left along the horizontal axis indicates an increase in labor input to the 
food sector, while an upward movement along the vertical axis indicates an increase in food 
output.

The lower-left quadrant represents the economy's allocation of labor. Both quantities are 
measured in the reverse of the usual direction. A downward movement along the vertical axis 
indicates an increase in the labor employed in cloth; a leftward movement along the horizontal 
axis indicates an increase in labor employed in food. Since an increase in employment in one 
sector must mean that less labor is available for the other, the possible allocations are 
indicated by a downward-sloping line. This line, labeled AA, slopes downward at a 45-degree 
angle; that is, it has a slope of -1. To see why this line represents the possible labor 
allocations, notice that if all labor were employed in food production, $L_F$ would equal $L$, 
while $L_C$ would equal 0. If one were then to move labor gradually into the cloth sector, 
each person-hour moved would increase $L_C$ by one unit while reducing $L_F$ by one unit, 
tracing a line with a slope of -1, until the entire labor supply $L$ is employed in the cloth 
sector. Any particular allocation of labor between the two sectors can then be represented by 
a point on AA, such as point 2.

We can now see how to determine production given any particular allocation of labor between 
the two sectors. Suppose the allocation of labor were represented by point 2 in the lower-left 
quadrant, that is, with $L²_C$ hours in cloth and $L²_F$ hours in food. Then we can use the 
production function for each sector to determine output: $Q²_C$ units of cloth, $Q²_F$ units 
of food. Using coordinates $Q²_C$, $Q²_F$, point 2' in the upper-right quadrant of Figure 4-3 
shows the resulting outputs of cloth and food.

To trace the whole production possibility frontier, we simply imagine repeating this exercise 
for many alternative allocations of labor. We might start with most of the labor allocated to 
food production, as at point 1 in the lower-left quadrant, and then gradually increase the 
amount of labor used in cloth until very few workers are employed in food, as at point 3; the 
corresponding points in the upper-right quadrant will trace out the curve running from 1' to 
3'. Thus, PP in the upper-right quadrant shows the economy's production possibilities for 
given supplies of land, labor, and capital.

### The Shape of the Production Possibility Frontier

In the Ricardian model, where labor is the only factor of production, the production 
possibility frontier is a straight line because the opportunity cost of cloth in terms of food 
is constant. In the specific factors model, however, the addition of other factors of 
production changes the shape of the production possibility frontier PP to a curve. The 
curvature of PP reflects diminishing returns to labor in each sector; these diminishing 
returns are the crucial difference between the specific factors and the Ricardian models.

Notice that when tracing PP, we shift labor from the food to the cloth sector. If we shift 
one person-hour of labor from food to cloth, however, this extra input will increase output in 
that sector by the marginal product of labor in cloth, $MPL_C$. To increase cloth output by 
one unit, then, we must increase labor input by $1/MPL_C$ hours. Meanwhile, each unit of labor 
input shifted out of food production will lower output in that sector by the marginal product 
of labor in food, $MPL_F$. To increase output of cloth by one unit, then, the economy must 
reduce output of food by $MPL_F/MPL_C$ units. The slope of PP, which measures the opportunity 
cost of cloth in terms of food—that is, the number of units of food output that must be 
sacrificed to increase cloth output by one unit—is therefore

$$\text{Slope of PP} = -\frac{MPL_F}{MPL_C}$$

We can now see why PP has the bowed shape it does. As we move from 1' to 3', $L_C$ rises and 
$L_F$ falls. We saw in Figure 4-2, however, that as $L_C$ rises, the marginal product of 
labor in cloth falls; correspondingly, as $L_F$ falls, the marginal product of labor in food 
rises. As more and more labor is moved to the cloth sector, each additional unit of labor 
becomes less valuable in the cloth sector and more valuable in the food sector: The 
opportunity cost (foregone food production) of each additional cloth unit rises, and PP thus 
gets steeper as we move down it to the right.

We have shown how output is determined, given the allocation of labor. The next step is to ask 
how a market economy determines what the allocation of labor should be.

## Prices, Wages, and Labor Allocation

How much labor will be employed in each sector? To answer this, we need to look at supply and 
demand in the labor market. The demand for labor in each sector depends on the price of output 
and the wage rate. In turn, the wage rate depends on the combined demand for labor by food and 
cloth producers. Given the prices of cloth and food together with the wage rate, we can 
determine each sector's employment and output.

First, let's focus on the demand for labor. In each sector, profit-maximizing employers will 
demand labor up to the point where the value produced by an additional person-hour equals the 
cost of employing that hour. In the cloth sector, for example, the value of an additional 
person-hour is the marginal product of labor in cloth multiplied by the price of one unit of 
cloth: $MPL_C \times P_C$. If $w$ is the wage rate of labor, employers will therefore hire 
workers up to the point where

$$MPL_C \times P_C = w$$

But the marginal product of labor in cloth, already illustrated in Figure 4-2, slopes downward 
because of diminishing returns. So for any given price of cloth $P_C$, the value of that 
marginal product, $MPL_C \times P_C$, will also slope down. We can therefore think of equation 
(4-4) as defining the demand curve for labor in the cloth sector: If the wage rate falls, 
other things equal, employers in the cloth sector will want to hire more workers.

Similarly, the value of an additional person-hour in food is $MPL_F \times P_F$. The demand 
curve for labor in the food sector may therefore be written

$$MPL_F \times P_F = w$$

The wage rate $w$ must be the same in both sectors because of the assumption that labor is 
freely mobile between sectors. That is, because labor is a mobile factor, it will move from 
the low-wage sector to the high-wage sector until wages are equalized. The wage rate, in turn, 
is determined by the requirement that total labor demand (total employment) equals total labor 
supply. This equilibrium condition for labor is represented in equation (4-3).

![Figure 4-4](8282aaa58a6f235dc09df34d93e72ed9f258f936500d158ddc63bd36c626822e.jpg)

**Figure 4-4:** The Allocation of Labor

*Labor is allocated so that the value of its marginal product (P × MPL) is the same in the 
cloth and food sectors. In equilibrium, the wage rate is equal to the value of labor's 
marginal product.*

By representing these two labor demand curves in a diagram (Figure 4-4), we can see how the 
wage rate and employment in each sector are determined given the prices of food and cloth. 
Along the horizontal axis of Figure 4-4, we show the total labor supply $L$. Measuring from 
the left of the diagram, we show the value of the marginal product of labor in cloth, which is 
simply the $MPL_C$ curve from Figure 4-2 multiplied by $P_C$. This is the demand curve for 
labor in the cloth sector. Measuring from the right, we show the value of the marginal product 
of labor in food, which is the demand for labor in food. The equilibrium wage rate and 
allocation of labor between the two sectors is represented by point 1. At the wage rate $w¹$, 
the sum of labor demanded in the cloth ($L¹_C$) and food ($L¹_F$) sectors just equals the 
total labor supply $L$.

### The Relationship Between Relative Prices and Output

A useful relationship between relative prices and output emerges clearly from this analysis of 
labor allocation; this relationship applies to more general situations than that described by 
the specific factors model. Equations (4-4) and (4-5) imply that

$$MPL_C \times P_C = MPL_F \times P_F = w$$

or, rearranging, that

$$-\frac{MPL_F}{MPL_C} = -\frac{P_C}{P_F}$$

The left side of equation (4-6) is the slope of the production possibility frontier at the 
actual production point; the right side is minus the relative price of cloth. This result 
tells us that at the production point, the production possibility frontier must be tangent to 
a line whose slope is minus the price of cloth divided by that of food. As we will see in the 
following chapters, this is a very general result that characterizes production responses to 
changes in relative prices along a production possibility frontier. It is illustrated in 
Figure 4-5: If the relative price of cloth is $(P_C/P_F)¹$, the economy produces at point 1.

![Figure 4-5](figure_4_5_placeholder.jpg)

**Figure 4-5:** Production in the Specific Factors Model

*The economy produces at a point on its production possibility frontier (PP) where the 
relative price of cloth is equal to the opportunity cost of producing cloth.*

### Effects of Price Changes

What happens to the allocation of labor and the distribution of income when the prices of food 
and cloth change? Notice that any price change can be broken into two parts: an equal-
proportional change in both $P_C$ and $P_F$ and a change in only one price. For example, 
suppose the price of cloth rises 17 percent and the price of food rises 10 percent. We can 
analyze the effects of this by first asking what happens if cloth and food prices both rise by 
10 percent and then by finding out what happens if only cloth prices rise by 7 percent. This 
allows us to separate the effect of changes in the overall price level from the effect of 
changes in relative prices.

#### Equal Proportional Price Changes

An equal proportional change in prices is like a change in the unit of account used to 
measure prices. If the prices of both cloth and food rise by 10 percent, then the real 
economy is unaffected. The wage rate will also rise by 10 percent to maintain the same 
equilibrium described by equations (4-4) and (4-5). The allocation of labor between the 
sectors and the outputs of cloth and food will remain unchanged. This is a general principle: 
Changes in all prices and wages that leave relative prices unchanged do not have real effects.

#### Changes in Relative Prices

Now let's ask what happens when only the price of cloth rises. This is a real change that 
will have real effects on the economy. We can see the impact using Figure 4-6.

Initially, the labor market is in equilibrium at point 1, with wage $w¹$. When the price of 
cloth rises, the value of the marginal product of labor in cloth shifts upward proportionally. 
The new equilibrium is at point 2, with a higher wage $w²$ and more labor employed in the 
cloth sector ($L²_C > L¹_C$) and less in the food sector ($L²_F < L¹_F$).

The important observations are:

1. **The wage rate rises, but by less than the price of cloth.** This means that while workers 
   benefit from higher wages, the real wage in terms of cloth (w/P_C) actually falls.

2. **Employment in the cloth sector rises, while employment in the food sector falls.** Labor 
   moves to the sector whose relative price has increased.

3. **Output of cloth rises, while output of food falls.** This follows from the change in labor 
   allocation.

## Income Distribution Effects

Now let's examine how changes in relative prices affect the incomes of the specific factors 
(capital and land) and the mobile factor (labor).

### Real Wage Effects

When the price of cloth rises relative to the price of food, what happens to the real wage—
that is, the wage measured in terms of what workers can buy? The answer is ambiguous because:

1. The real wage in terms of food, $w/P_F$, definitely rises because $w$ rises while $P_F$ 
   stays constant.

2. The real wage in terms of cloth, $w/P_C$, definitely falls because $w$ rises by less than 
   $P_C$.

Whether workers are better or worse off depends on their consumption patterns. If they consume 
mostly food, they gain; if they consume mostly cloth, they lose. Typically, workers consume 
both goods, so the effect is ambiguous.

### Specific Factor Income Effects

The effects on the specific factors are unambiguous:

1. **Capital owners (in the cloth sector) gain.** The real rental rate of capital rises in 
   terms of both goods.

2. **Landowners (in the food sector) lose.** The real rental rate of land falls in terms of 
   both goods.

To see why, consider that in the cloth sector, labor input has increased while capital input 
remains fixed. This raises the marginal product of capital, and thus its real return. The 
opposite happens in the food sector: With less labor working with the same amount of land, the 
marginal product of land falls.

This pattern illustrates a general principle: When relative prices change, the owners of 
factors specific to the sector whose relative price rises gain, while the owners of factors 
specific to the sector whose relative price falls lose.

## Analyzing International Trade

Let's now consider what happens when a country opens up to international trade. Suppose our 
economy initially has no trade with the rest of the world (autarky) and then opens up to trade.

### Trade Patterns

If the world relative price of cloth is higher than our autarky price, our country will export 
cloth and import food. This is equivalent to an increase in the relative price of cloth in our 
economy, with the following effects:

1. Production of cloth increases, and production of food decreases.
2. Labor moves from the food sector to the cloth sector.
3. Capital owners gain, landowners lose, and the effect on workers is ambiguous.

Conversely, if the world relative price of cloth is lower than our autarky price, our country 
will import cloth and export food, with opposite effects.

### Winners and Losers from Trade

The specific factors model shows clearly that international trade creates both winners and 
losers:

**Winners:**
- Owners of factors specific to the export sector
- Possibly workers (depending on consumption patterns)

**Losers:**
- Owners of factors specific to the import-competing sector
- Possibly workers (depending on consumption patterns)

This explains why trade is politically contentious. Even though trade increases total income 
(the country as a whole gains), the gains are not evenly distributed. Those who lose from 
trade have an incentive to oppose it, while those who gain have an incentive to support it.

### The Case of Sugar Protection

Let's apply this model to understand U.S. sugar protection. The United States restricts sugar 
imports through quotas and tariffs, keeping the domestic price well above the world price. 
Using our model:

- **Without protection:** The U.S. would import sugar at the world price, benefiting consumers 
  but hurting domestic sugar producers.
- **With protection:** The high domestic price benefits sugar farmers (owners of land specific 
  to sugar production) but hurts consumers through higher prices.

The concentrated benefits to sugar farmers and the dispersed costs to consumers help explain 
why this protection persists despite its overall economic inefficiency.

## Adjustment Costs and Labor Mobility

One of the key assumptions of the specific factors model is that capital and land cannot move 
between sectors. This is reasonable in the short run, but what about labor?

While we've assumed that labor can move freely between sectors, in reality, this mobility 
involves costs:

1. **Search costs:** Workers must spend time and resources finding new jobs.
2. **Training costs:** Workers may need to acquire new skills for different occupations.
3. **Relocation costs:** Workers may need to move geographically.
4. **Psychological costs:** Changing careers can be stressful and disruptive.

These adjustment costs mean that even labor is somewhat specific in the very short run. Over 
time, however, workers can and do adjust to changing economic conditions.

### Policy Implications

The existence of adjustment costs and income distribution effects has important policy 
implications:

1. **Trade Adjustment Assistance:** Many countries provide support to workers displaced by 
   trade, including unemployment benefits, retraining programs, and relocation assistance.

2. **Gradual Liberalization:** Trade liberalization is often implemented gradually to allow 
   time for adjustment.

3. **Compensation Schemes:** In principle, the winners from trade could compensate the losers, 
   though this rarely happens in practice.

4. **Political Economy:** The concentrated losses in import-competing sectors often lead to 
   stronger political opposition than the diffuse gains to consumers can overcome.

## The Long Run Perspective

While the specific factors model captures important short-run effects of trade, it's important 
to remember that factors become more mobile over time:

1. **Capital mobility:** Over several years, capital can be redirected from declining to 
   growing sectors through depreciation and new investment.

2. **Labor mobility:** Workers acquire new skills and find new occupations, though this 
   process can take years.

3. **Land use changes:** Even land can be repurposed over time (e.g., from farming to 
   residential or commercial use).

In the long run, the economy may look more like the Heckscher-Ohlin model (discussed in 
Chapter 5), where factors are mobile across sectors. However, the adjustment process can be 
long and painful for those affected.

## Summary

The specific factors model provides important insights into the short-run effects of 
international trade:

1. **Factor specificity:** When factors cannot move between sectors, changes in relative prices 
   have different effects on different groups.

2. **Income distribution:** Trade creates winners and losers. Owners of factors specific to 
   export sectors gain, while owners of factors specific to import-competing sectors lose.

3. **Ambiguous effects on mobile factors:** The welfare effect on mobile factors (like labor) 
   depends on their consumption patterns.

4. **Political economy of trade:** The uneven distribution of gains from trade helps explain 
   political opposition to trade liberalization.

5. **Adjustment costs:** The transition to free trade involves real costs for displaced workers 
   and industries.

6. **Policy responses:** Understanding these effects is crucial for designing policies that can 
   facilitate adjustment and potentially compensate losers.

The specific factors model thus provides a more nuanced view of international trade than the 
Ricardian model. While trade still offers the potential for mutual gain, realizing these gains 
requires attention to distribution effects and adjustment costs. This framework helps us 
understand both the economics and the politics of international trade policy.