---
cssclasses: [international-economics]
title: Chapter 5. Resources and Trade_ The Heckscher-Ohlin Model
tags: [international-economics, heckscher-ohlin-model, factor-proportions, comparative-advantage]
aliases: [Heckscher-Ohlin Model, Factor Proportions Theory]
key_concepts:
  - Factor Abundance
  - Factor Intensity
  - Factor-Proportions Theory
  - Factor Price Equalization
  - Stolper-Samuelson Theorem
  - Rybczynski Theorem
  - Long-run Income Distribution
  - Resource Endowments
linter-yaml-title-alias: Chapter 5. Resources and Trade_ The Heckscher-Ohlin Model
---

# Chapter 5. Resources and Trade: The Heckscher-Ohlin Model

If labor were the only factor of production, as the Ricardian model assumes, comparative 
advantage could arise only because of international differences in labor productivity. In the 
real world, however, while trade is partly explained by differences in labor productivity, it 
also reflects differences in countries' resources. Canada exports forest products to the 
United States not because its lumberjacks are more productive relative to their U.S. 
counterparts but because sparsely populated Canada has more forested land per capita than the 
United States. Thus, a realistic view of trade must allow for the importance not just of labor 
but also of other factors of production such as land, capital, and mineral resources.

To explain the role of resource differences in trade, this chapter examines a model in which 
resource differences are the only source of trade. This model shows that comparative advantage 
is influenced by the interaction between nations' resources (the relative abundance of factors 
of production, called factor abundance) and the technology of production (which influences the 
relative intensity with which different factors of production, called factor intensity, are 
used in the production of different goods). Some of these ideas were presented in the specific 
factors model of Chapter 4, but the model we study in this chapter puts the interaction 
between abundance and intensity in sharper relief by looking at long-run outcomes when all 
factors of production are mobile across sectors.

That international trade is largely driven by differences in countries' resources is one of 
the most influential theories in international economics. Developed by two Swedish economists, 
Eli Heckscher and Bertil Ohlin (Ohlin received the Nobel Prize in economics in 1977), the 
theory is often referred to as the Heckscher-Ohlin theory. Because the theory emphasizes the 
interplay between the proportions in which different factors of production are available in 
different countries and the proportions in which they are used in producing different goods, 
it is also referred to as the factor-proportions theory.

To develop the factor-proportions theory, we begin by describing an economy that does not 
trade and then ask what happens when two such economies trade with each other. We will see 
that as opposed to the Ricardian model with a single factor of production, trade can affect 
the distribution of income across factors, even in the long run. We discuss the extent to 
which trade may be contributing to increases in wage inequality in developed countries. We 
then conclude with a further review of the empirical evidence for (and against) the 
predictions of the factor-proportions theory of trade.

## Learning Goals

After reading this chapter, you will be able to:

- Explain how differences in resources generate a specific pattern of trade
- Discuss why the gains from trade will not be equally spread even in the long run and 
  identify the likely winners and losers
- Understand the possible links between increased trade and rising wage inequality in the 
  developed world
- See how empirical patterns of trade and factor prices support some (but not all) of the 
  predictions of the factor-proportions theory

## Model of a Two-Factor Economy

In this chapter, we'll focus on the simplest version of the factor-proportions model, 
sometimes referred to as "2 by 2 by 2": two countries, two goods, two factors of production. 
In our example, we'll call the two countries Home and Foreign. We will stick with the same two 
goods, cloth (measured in yards) and food (measured in calories), that we used in the specific 
factors model of Chapter 4. The key difference is that in this chapter, we assume that the 
immobile factors that were specific to each sector (capital in cloth, land in food) are now 
mobile in the long run. Thus, land used for farming can be used to build a textile plant; 
conversely, the capital used to pay for a power loom can be used to pay for a tractor. To keep 
things simple, we model a single additional factor that we call capital, which is used in 
conjunction with labor to produce either cloth or food. In the long run, both capital and 
labor can move across sectors, thus equalizing their returns (rental rate and wage) in both 
sectors.

### Prices and Production

Both cloth and food are produced using capital and labor. The amount of each good produced, 
given how much capital and labor are employed in each sector, is determined by a production 
function for each good:

$$Q_C = Q_C(K_C, L_C)$$
$$Q_F = Q_F(K_F, L_F)$$

where $Q_C$ and $Q_F$ are the output levels of cloth and food, $K_C$ and $L_C$ are the amounts 
of capital and labor employed in cloth production, and $K_F$ and $L_F$ are the amounts of 
capital and labor employed in food production. Overall, the economy has a fixed supply of 
capital $K$ and labor $L$ that is divided between employment in the two sectors.

We define the following expressions that are related to the two production technologies:

- $a_{KC}$ = capital used to produce one yard of cloth
- $a_{LC}$ = labor used to produce one yard of cloth
- $a_{KF}$ = capital used to produce one calorie of food
- $a_{LF}$ = labor used to produce one calorie of food

These unit input requirements are very similar to the ones defined in the Ricardian model (for 
labor only). However, there is one crucial difference: In these definitions, we speak of the 
quantity of capital or labor used to produce a given amount of cloth or food rather than the 
quantity required to produce that amount. The reason for this change from the Ricardian model 
is that when there are two factors of production, there may be some room for choice in the use 
of inputs.

### The Production Possibility Frontier

In general, those choices will depend on the factor prices for labor and capital. However, 
let's first look at a special case in which there is only one way to produce each good. 
Consider the following numerical example: Production of one yard of cloth requires a 
combination of two work-hours and two machine-hours. The production of food is more automated; 
as a result, production of one calorie of food requires only one work-hour along with three 
machine-hours. Thus, all the unit input requirements are fixed at $a_{KC} = 2$, $a_{LC} = 2$, 
$a_{KF} = 3$, $a_{LF} = 1$, and there is no possibility of substituting labor for capital or 
vice versa. Assume that an economy is endowed with 3,000 units of machine-hours along with 
2,000 units of work-hours.

In this special case of no factor substitution in production, the economy's production 
possibility frontier can be derived using those two resource constraints for capital and 
labor. Production of $Q_C$ yards of cloth requires $2Q_C = a_{KC} \times Q_C$ machine-hours 
and $2Q_C = a_{LC} \times Q_C$ work-hours. Similarly, production of $Q_F$ calories of food 
requires $3Q_F = a_{KF} \times Q_F$ machine-hours and $1Q_F = a_{LF} \times Q_F$ work-hours. 
The total machine-hours used for both cloth and food production cannot exceed the total supply 
of capital:

$$a_{KC} \times Q_C + a_{KF} \times Q_F \leq K \quad \text{or} \quad 2Q_C + 3Q_F \leq 3,000$$

This is the resource constraint for capital. Similarly, the resource constraint for labor 
states that the total work-hours used in production cannot exceed the total supply of labor:

$$a_{LC} \times Q_C + a_{LF} \times Q_F \leq L \quad \text{or} \quad 2Q_C + Q_F \leq 2,000$$

![Figure 5-1](ea95b305600eeb9b9e829b43d48010aa68d7cd476e125c0c68459c06b6b8f409.jpg)

**Figure 5-1:** The Production Possibility Frontier without Factor Substitution: Numerical 
Example

*If capital cannot be substituted for labor or vice versa, the production possibility frontier 
in the factor-proportions model would be defined by two resource constraints: The economy can't 
use more than the available supply of labor (2,000 work-hours) or capital (3,000 machine-
hours). So the production possibility frontier is defined by the solid line in this figure. At 
point 1, the economy specializes in food production, and not all available work-hours are 
employed. At point 2, the economy specializes in cloth, and not all available machine-hours 
are employed. At production point 3, the economy employs all of its labor and capital 
resources. The important feature of the production possibility frontier is that the opportunity 
cost of cloth in terms of food isn't constant: It rises from 2/3 to 2 when the economy's mix 
of production shifts toward cloth.*

Figure 5-1 shows the implications of equations (5-1) and (5-2) for the production 
possibilities in our numerical example. Each resource constraint is drawn in the same way we 
drew the production possibility line for the Ricardian case in Figure 3-1. In this case, 
however, the economy must produce subject to both constraints, so the production possibility 
frontier is the solid line. If the economy specializes in food production (point 1), then it 
can produce 1,000 calories of food. At that production point, there is spare labor capacity: 
Only 1,000 work-hours out of 2,000 are employed. Conversely, if the economy specializes in 
cloth production (point 2), then it can produce 1,000 yards of cloth. At that production 
point, there is spare capital capacity: Only 2,000 machine-hours out of 3,000 are employed. At 
production point 3, the economy is employing all of its labor and capital resources (1,500 
machine-hours and 1,500 work-hours in cloth production, and 1,500 machine-hours along with 500 
work-hours in food production).

The important feature of this production possibility frontier is that the opportunity cost of 
producing an extra yard of cloth in terms of food is not constant. When the economy is 
producing mostly food (to the left of point 3), then there is spare labor capacity. Producing 
two fewer units of food releases six machine-hours that can be used to produce three yards of 
cloth: The opportunity cost of cloth is 2/3. When the economy is producing mostly cloth (to 
the right of point 3), then there is spare capital capacity. Producing two fewer units of food 
releases two work-hours that can be used to produce one yard of cloth: The opportunity cost of 
cloth is 2. Thus, the opportunity cost of cloth is higher when more units of cloth are being 
produced.

Now let's make the model more realistic and allow the possibility of substituting capital for 
labor and vice versa in production. This substitution removes the kink in the production 
possibility frontier; instead, the frontier PP has the bowed shape shown in Figure 5-2. The 
bowed shape tells us that the opportunity cost in terms of food of producing one more unit of 
cloth rises as the economy produces more cloth and less food. That is, our basic insight about 
how opportunity costs change with the mix of production remains valid.

![Figure 5-2](aeddaa107587d9406fc857692be00506f94ff7c3e1344acce144e74cc670090a.jpg)

**Figure 5-2:** The Production Possibility Frontier with Factor Substitution

*If capital can be substituted for labor and vice versa, the production possibility frontier 
no longer has a kink. But it remains true that the opportunity cost of cloth in terms of food 
rises as the economy's production mix shifts toward cloth and away from food.*

### Equilibrium in the Production Markets

Where on the production possibility frontier does the economy produce? It depends on prices. 
Specifically, the economy produces at the point that maximizes the value of production. Figure 
5-3 shows what this implies. The value of the economy's production is

$$V = P_C \times Q_C + P_F \times Q_F$$

where $P_C$ and $P_F$ are the prices of cloth and food, respectively. An isovalue line—a line 
along which the value of output is constant—has a slope of $-P_C/P_F$. The economy produces at 
the point Q, the point on the production possibility frontier that touches the highest 
possible isovalue line. At that point, the slope of the production possibility frontier is 
equal to $-P_C/P_F$. So the opportunity cost in terms of food of producing another unit of 
cloth is equal to the relative price of cloth.

![Figure 5-3](7a4c3e3a8cc42cff640e0959cdd7d81394545c376323c50959edff28572355b8.jpg)

**Figure 5-3:** Prices and Production

*The economy produces at the point that maximizes the value of production given the prices it 
faces; this is the point on the highest possible isovalue line. At that point, the opportunity 
cost of cloth in terms of food is equal to the relative price of cloth, P_C/P_F.*

### Choosing the Mix of Inputs

As we have noted, in a two-factor model producers may have room for choice in the use of 
inputs. A farmer, for example, can choose between using relatively more mechanized equipment 
(capital) and fewer workers, or vice versa. Thus, the farmer can choose how much labor and 
capital to use per unit of output produced. In each sector, then, producers will face not 
fixed input requirements (as in the Ricardian model) but trade-offs like the one illustrated 
by curve II in Figure 5-4, which shows alternative input combinations that can be used to 
produce one calorie of food.

![Figure 5-4](a47e6efc6278aa4ac349b4047da5ea0257e5fe1670015d33d79a17d2dc6c8cff.jpg)

**Figure 5-4:** Input Possibilities in Food Production

*A farmer can produce a calorie of food with less capital if he or she uses more labor, and 
vice versa.*

What input choice will producers actually make? It depends on the relative costs of capital 
and labor. If capital rental rates are high and wages low, farmers will choose to produce 
using relatively little capital and a lot of labor; on the other hand, if the rental rates are 
low and wages high, they will save on labor and use a lot more capital. If $w$ is the wage 
rate and $r$ the rental cost of capital, then the input choice will depend on the ratio of 
these two factor prices, $w/r$. The relationship between factor prices and the ratio of labor 
to capital use in production of food is shown in Figure 5-5 as the curve FF.

![Figure 5-5](dcc3fa5c58c6373de309cb18ccd2fbc79349bf4fe519b5532bcd162491e970b2.jpg)

**Figure 5-5:** Factor Prices and Input Choices

*In each sector, the ratio of labor to capital used in production depends on the cost of labor 
relative to the cost of capital, w/r. The curve FF shows the labor-capital ratio choices in 
food production, while the curve CC shows the corresponding choices in cloth production. At 
any given wage-rental ratio, cloth production uses a higher labor-capital ratio; when this is 
the case, we say that cloth production is labor-intensive and that food production is 
capital-intensive.*

### Factor Intensity

There is a corresponding relationship between $w/r$ and the labor-capital ratio in cloth 
production. This relationship is shown in Figure 5-5 as the curve CC. As drawn, CC is shifted 
out relative to FF, indicating that at any given factor prices, production of cloth will 
always use more labor relative to capital than will production of food. When this is true, we 
say that production of cloth is labor-intensive, while production of food is capital-
intensive. Notice that the definition of intensity depends on the ratio of labor to capital 
used in production, not the ratio of labor or capital to output. Thus a good cannot be both 
capital- and labor-intensive.

The CC and FF curves in Figure 5-5 are called relative factor demand curves; they are very 
similar to the relative demand curve for goods. Their downward slope characterizes the 
substitution effect in the producers' factor demand. As the wage $w$ rises relative to the 
rental rate $r$, producers substitute capital for labor in their production decisions. The 
previous case we considered with no factor substitution is a limiting case, where the relative 
demand curve is a vertical line: The ratio of labor to capital demanded is fixed and does not 
vary with changes in the wage-rental ratio $w/r$. In the remainder of this chapter, we 
consider the more general case with factor substitution, where the relative factor demand 
curves are downward sloping.

## Factor Prices and Goods Prices

Suppose for a moment the economy produces both cloth and food. (This need not be the case if 
the economy engages in international trade because it might specialize completely in producing 
one good or the other, but let us temporarily ignore this possibility.) Then competition among 
producers in each sector will ensure that the price of each good equals its cost of 
production. The cost of producing a good depends on factor prices: If wages rise—other things 
equal—the price of any good whose production uses labor will also rise.

The importance of a particular factor's price to the cost of producing a good depends, 
however, on how much of that factor the good's production involves. If food production makes 
use of very little labor, for example, then a rise in the wage will not have much effect on 
the price of food, whereas if cloth production uses a great deal of labor, a rise in the wage 
will have a large effect on the price. We can therefore conclude that there is a one-to-one 
relationship between the ratio of the wage rate to the rental rate, $w/r$, and the ratio of 
the price of cloth to that of food, $P_C/P_F$. This relationship is illustrated by the 
upward-sloping curve SS in Figure 5-6.

![Figure 5-6](5f127a0c7ce295a6cadb302aa4462d4d44268e824d031654610d93261791def0.jpg)

**Figure 5-6:** Factor Prices and Goods Prices

*Because cloth production is labor-intensive while food production is capital-intensive, there 
is a one-to-one relationship between the factor price ratio w/r and the relative price of 
cloth P_C/P_F; the higher the relative cost of labor, the higher must be the relative price of 
the labor-intensive good. The relationship is illustrated by the curve SS.*

### Stolper-Samuelson Theorem

Let's look at Figures 5-5 and 5-6 together. In Figure 5-7, the left panel is Figure 5-6 (of 
the SS curve) turned counterclockwise 90 degrees, while the right panel reproduces Figure 5-5. 
By putting these two diagrams together, we see what may seem at first to be a surprising 
linkage of the prices of goods to the ratio of labor to capital used in the production of each 
good. Suppose the relative price of cloth is $(P_C/P_F)^1$ (left panel of Figure 5-7); if the 
economy produces both goods, the ratio of the wage rate to the capital rental rate must equal 
$(w/r)^1$. This ratio then implies that the ratios of labor to capital employed in the 
production of cloth and food must be $(L_C/K_C)^1$ and $(L_F/K_F)^1$, respectively (right 
panel of Figure 5-7). If the relative price of cloth were to rise to the level indicated by 
$(P_C/P_F)^2$, the ratio of the wage rate to the capital rental rate would rise to $(w/r)^2$. 
Because labor is now relatively more expensive, the ratios of labor to capital employed in the 
production of cloth and food would therefore drop to $(L_C/K_C)^2$ and $(L_F/K_F)^2$.

![Figure 5-7](ca3a581327a7b450e259ade6aeaadfdaf5cea0444b01d06db5ff35aa9142441c.jpg)

**Figure 5-7:** From Goods Prices to Input Choices

*Given the relative price of cloth (P_C/P_F)^1, the ratio of the wage rate to the capital 
rental rate must equal (w/r)^1. This wage-rental ratio then implies that the ratios of labor 
to capital employed in the production of cloth and food must be (L_C/K_C)^1 and (L_F/K_F)^1. 
If the relative price of cloth rises to (P_C/P_F)^2, the wage-rental ratio must rise to 
(w/r)^2. This will cause the labor-capital ratio used in the production of both goods to drop.*

We can learn one more important lesson from this diagram. The left panel already tells us that 
an increase in the price of cloth relative to that of food will raise the income of workers 
relative to that of capital owners. But it is possible to make a stronger statement: Such a 
change in relative prices will unambiguously raise the purchasing power of workers and lower 
the purchasing power of capital owners by raising real wages and lowering real rents in terms 
of both goods.

How do we know this? When $P_C/P_F$ increases, the ratio of labor to capital falls in both 
cloth and food production. But in a competitive economy, factors of production are paid their 
marginal product—the real wage of workers in terms of cloth is equal to the marginal 
productivity of labor in cloth production, and so on. When the ratio of labor to capital falls 
in producing either good, the marginal product of labor in terms of that good increases—so 
workers find their real wage higher in terms of both goods. On the other hand, the marginal 
product of capital falls in both industries, so capital owners find their real incomes lower 
in terms of both goods.

In this model, then, as in the specific factors model, changes in relative prices have strong 
effects on income distribution. Not only does a change in the prices of goods change the 
distribution of income; it always changes it so much that owners of one factor of production 
gain while owners of the other are made worse off. This result is known as the 
Stolper-Samuelson theorem, named after the two economists who first proved it.

## Resources and Output

We can now complete the description of a two-factor economy by describing the relationship 
between goods prices, factor supplies, and output. In particular, we investigate how changes 
in resources (the total supply of a factor) affect the allocation of factors across sectors 
and the associated changes in output produced.

### The Rybczynski Theorem

Suppose we take the relative price of cloth as given. We know from Figure 5-7 that a given 
relative price of cloth, say $(P_C/P_F)^1$, is associated with a fixed wage-rental ratio 
$(w/r)^1$ (so long as both cloth and food are produced). That ratio, in turn, determines the 
ratios of labor to capital employed in both the cloth and the food sectors: $(L_C/K_C)^1$ and 
$(L_F/K_F)^1$, respectively. Now we assume that the economy's labor force grows, which implies 
that the economy's aggregate labor to capital ratio, $L/K$, increases. At the given relative 
price of cloth $(P_C/P_F)^1$, we just saw that the ratios of labor to capital employed in both 
sectors remain constant. How can the economy accommodate the increase in the aggregate 
relative supply of labor $L/K$ if the relative labor demanded in each sector remains constant 
at $(L_C/K_C)^1$ and $(L_F/K_F)^1$? In other words, how does the economy employ the additional 
labor hours?

The answer lies in the allocation of labor and capital across sectors: The labor-capital ratio 
in the cloth sector is higher than that in the food sector, so the economy can increase the 
employment of labor to capital (holding the labor-capital ratio fixed in each sector) by 
allocating more labor and capital to the production of cloth (which is labor-intensive). As 
labor and capital move from the food sector to the cloth sector, the economy produces more 
cloth and less food.

This result is known as the Rybczynski theorem, named after the economist who first proved it: 
At given relative prices, an increase in a country's endowment of a factor (labor in this 
case) leads to an expansion of output in the sector that uses that factor intensively (cloth) 
and a contraction of output in the other sector (food).

![Figure 5-8](figure_5_8_placeholder.jpg)

**Figure 5-8:** The Effect of Resource Changes on Output

*At given relative prices, an increase in the labor supply leads to a biased expansion of 
production possibilities: Output of the labor-intensive good (cloth) rises more than 
proportionally, while output of the capital-intensive good (food) actually falls.*

## Effects of International Trade Between Two-Factor Economies

Having outlined the production structure of a two-factor economy, we can now analyze the 
effects of international trade between two economies with different factor endowments. The key 
insight of the Heckscher-Ohlin model is that differences in factor endowments between 
countries create comparative advantages that determine the pattern of trade.

### Relative Prices and the Pattern of Trade

Suppose there are two countries, Home and Foreign, with different factor endowments. Home has 
a higher ratio of labor to capital than Foreign: $L/K > L^*/K^*$. We say that Home is 
labor-abundant and Foreign is capital-abundant.

In the absence of trade, these different factor endowments lead to different relative prices. 
Since Home is labor-abundant, labor will be relatively cheap there, and so will labor-
intensive goods. Since Foreign is capital-abundant, capital will be relatively cheap there, 
and so will capital-intensive goods. Specifically, if cloth is labor-intensive and food is 
capital-intensive, we would expect:

$$(P_C/P_F)_{\text{Home}} < (P_C/P_F)_{\text{Foreign}}$$

in the absence of trade.

When the countries open up to trade, they will export the goods in which they have a 
comparative advantage. Home will export cloth (the labor-intensive good) and import food (the 
capital-intensive good). Foreign will export food and import cloth. This pattern of trade is 
summarized by the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem: Countries tend to export goods whose production is 
intensive in factors with which they are abundantly endowed.

### Factor Price Equalization

One of the most striking implications of the Heckscher-Ohlin model is the factor price 
equalization theorem. This theorem states that international trade in goods alone can lead to 
the equalization of factor prices across countries, even when factors themselves cannot move 
internationally.

Here's the intuition: As countries trade, the relative prices of goods converge. We've seen 
that there's a one-to-one relationship between relative goods prices and relative factor 
prices. As goods prices converge, so do factor prices. Specifically:

1. Trade raises the relative price of cloth in Foreign and lowers it in Home.
2. This raises the relative wage in Foreign and lowers it in Home.
3. Eventually, if trade is free and complete, factor prices equalize: $(w/r)_{\text{Home}} = 
   (w/r)_{\text{Foreign}}$.

In reality, we don't observe complete factor price equalization. Factors like transportation 
costs, trade barriers, and differences in technology prevent complete equalization. However, 
there is evidence of some convergence in factor prices due to trade.

### Income Distribution Effects

The Heckscher-Ohlin model has strong implications for income distribution:

1. **Winners and losers from trade**: In each country, owners of the abundant factor gain from 
   trade, while owners of the scarce factor lose.
   - In Home (labor-abundant): Workers gain, capital owners lose.
   - In Foreign (capital-abundant): Capital owners gain, workers lose.

2. **Long-run nature of effects**: Unlike the specific factors model, these effects persist in 
   the long run when all factors are mobile between sectors.

3. **Political economy implications**: The model helps explain political attitudes toward 
   trade. In developed countries (typically capital-abundant), we might expect capital owners 
   to favor free trade while workers oppose it.

## Empirical Evidence on the Heckscher-Ohlin Model

How well does the Heckscher-Ohlin model explain actual trade patterns? The empirical evidence 
is mixed:

### Supporting Evidence

1. **Broad patterns**: The model successfully explains some broad patterns of trade. For 
   example, developed countries tend to export capital-intensive goods while developing 
   countries export labor-intensive goods.

2. **Factor content of trade**: Studies of the factor content of trade show that countries do 
   tend to export factors in which they are abundant, although the effect is weaker than the 
   model predicts.

3. **Historical episodes**: Specific historical episodes, such as the opening of trade between 
   Europe and the Americas in the 16th century, show patterns consistent with the model.

### The Leontief Paradox

One of the most famous challenges to the Heckscher-Ohlin model is the Leontief paradox. In 
1953, Wassily Leontief found that U.S. exports were less capital-intensive than U.S. imports, 
contradicting the expectation that the capital-abundant United States would export capital-
intensive goods.

Several explanations have been proposed for this paradox:

1. **Human capital**: The United States may be abundant in human capital (skilled labor), 
   which wasn't measured in Leontief's study.

2. **Technology differences**: The model assumes identical technologies across countries, but 
   the U.S. may have had superior technology.

3. **Factor intensity reversals**: Some goods may be capital-intensive at some factor price 
   ratios but labor-intensive at others.

4. **Natural resources**: The model doesn't account for natural resources, which may affect 
   trade patterns.

### Modern Extensions

Modern trade economists have extended the Heckscher-Ohlin model in several ways:

1. **Multiple factors**: Including more factors (skilled labor, unskilled labor, capital, 
   land, etc.) improves the model's predictions.

2. **Intermediate goods**: Accounting for trade in intermediate goods and global value chains.

3. **Technology differences**: Allowing for productivity differences across countries.

4. **Trade costs**: Incorporating transportation costs and other trade barriers.

These extensions help reconcile the model with empirical observations while maintaining its 
core insights about the relationship between factor endowments and trade patterns.

## Trade and Income Inequality

One of the most policy-relevant applications of the Heckscher-Ohlin model concerns the 
relationship between trade and income inequality. The model predicts that trade with 
developing countries should reduce the wages of unskilled workers in developed countries. This 
prediction has received significant attention as income inequality has risen in many developed 
countries.

### The Debate

The debate centers on whether increased trade with developing countries is responsible for:

1. Rising wage inequality between skilled and unskilled workers
2. Declining real wages for unskilled workers
3. Job losses in manufacturing

### Evidence

The evidence suggests that trade has contributed to rising inequality, but it's not the only 
factor:

1. **Trade effects**: Studies find that trade with developing countries has put downward 
   pressure on wages of unskilled workers in developed countries.

2. **Technology effects**: Skill-biased technological change has also increased the demand for 
   skilled relative to unskilled workers.

3. **Magnitudes**: Most studies find that technology has been more important than trade in 
   explaining rising inequality, though trade effects are significant.

4. **Other factors**: Changes in labor market institutions (unions, minimum wages), 
   immigration, and education also affect inequality.

### Policy Implications

The link between trade and inequality raises important policy questions:

1. **Trade adjustment assistance**: Should governments compensate workers hurt by trade?

2. **Education and training**: How can we help workers adapt to changing skill demands?

3. **Progressive taxation**: Should the tax system be used to offset rising inequality?

4. **Trade policy**: Do the distributional effects of trade justify protectionism?

Most economists argue that the gains from trade exceed the losses, even accounting for 
distributional effects. However, the uneven distribution of gains and losses creates political 
challenges for maintaining open trade policies.

## Summary

The Heckscher-Ohlin model provides a powerful framework for understanding how differences in 
factor endowments shape international trade patterns. Key insights include:

1. **Comparative advantage from factor endowments**: Countries have comparative advantages in 
   goods that use their abundant factors intensively.

2. **Factor price equalization**: Trade tends to equalize factor prices across countries, even 
   without factor mobility.

3. **Income distribution effects**: Trade benefits abundant factors and hurts scarce factors 
   within each country.

4. **Long-run nature**: Unlike the specific factors model, these effects persist when all 
   factors are mobile between sectors.

5. **Empirical relevance**: While the model doesn't explain all aspects of trade, it captures 
   important patterns and provides insights into policy debates.

The model's predictions about income distribution have proven particularly relevant to 
contemporary debates about globalization and inequality. Understanding these effects is 
crucial for designing policies that can maintain the benefits of trade while addressing its 
distributional consequences.

As we'll see in subsequent chapters, the Heckscher-Ohlin model is just one piece of the 
puzzle. Modern trade also involves economies of scale, product differentiation, and 
multinational corporations—factors that go beyond the resource-based trade explained by the 
Heckscher-Ohlin model. Nevertheless, factor endowments remain an important determinant of 
trade patterns, and the model's insights continue to inform both research and policy debates.