---
title: The Foreign Exchange Market Annotations
tags:
  - currency_arbitrage
  - exchange_rate
  - foreign_exchange_market
  - forward_exchange_rate
  - spot_exchange_rate
aliases:
  - Currency Trading
  - FX Market
  - Forex
key_concepts:
  - Currency arbitrage
  - Currency price
  - Forward rate
  - Nominal exchange rate
  - Spot rate
---

# The Foreign Exchange Market Annotations

 CHAPTER 1 THE [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) MARKET

The main centre for [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) trading is London,  with some \$3576 billion worth of [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) traded on a daily basis,  quite a lot when one considers that the annual gross domestic product of the United Kingdom in 2019 was approximately 80.5% of that at$2,   879 billion. Other important [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) centres are New York with$1370 billion,  Tokyo with$376 billion,    Singapore$640 billion,  Paris$167 billion and Frankfurt$124 billion. The net volume of [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) dealing globally was in April 2019 estimated to be in excess of$8.3 trillion per day. 

The exchange rate is simply the price of one [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) in terms of another,  and there are two methods of expressing it:

1. Foreign [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) units per unit of the domestic [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md): taking the pound sterling as the domestic [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md),  on 16 December 2020 approximately$1.35 was required to obtain one pound,    that is,   $1.35/£1;
1. Domestic [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) units per unit of foreign [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md): again,  taking the pound sterling as the domestic [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md),  on 16 December 2020 there was approximately

£0.7407 required to purchase one US dollar,  that is,  £0.7407/$1

If the first definition is employed,  a rise in the exchange rate from$1.35/£1 to,    say,   $1.50/£1 would mean that more dollars are required to purchase one pound,  so that the pound has appreciated or,  equivalently,  the dollar has depreciated. Conversely,  if the second definition is used,  a rise in the pounds per dollar exchange rate from,  say,  £0.6667/$1 to £0.7407/$1 means that more pounds have to be given to obtain a dollar,  which means that the pound has depreciated in value or,  equivalently,  the dollar has appreciated in value.

The bid rate is the rate at which a bank will buy sterling,  while the offer rate is the rate at which the bank will sell sterling in exchange for dollars. The difference is known as the bid–offer spread and represents the gross [profit margin](../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Financial%20Ratios/Operating%20Margin.md) of the bank.

Thinly traded currencies tend to have the largest spread,  which usually increases if the risks of trading in a particular [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) are perceived to have risen. 

 1.3 CHARACTERISTICS AND PARTICIPANTS OF THE [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) MARKET
 Easily the most heavily traded [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) is the US dollar which is known as a vehicle [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) – because the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) is widely used to denominate international transactions. Oil and many other important primary products such as tin,  coffee and gold all tend to be priced in dollars.

The main participants in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market can be categorized as follows:

- Retail clients. These are made up of businesses,  international investors,  multinational corporations and the like who need [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) for the purposes of operating their businesses. Normally,  they do not directly purchase or sell foreign currencies themselves; rather they operate by placing buy/sell orders with the commercial banks.
- Commercial banks. The commercial banks carry out buy/sell orders from their retail clients and buy/sell currencies on their own account (known as proprietary trading) so as to alter the structure of their assets and liabilities in different currencies. The banks deal either directly with other banks or through [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) brokers. In addition to the commercial banks,  other [financial institutions](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) such as merchant banks are engaged in buying and selling currencies both for proprietary purposes and on behalf of their customers in finance-related transactions.
- [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) brokers. Often banks do not trade directly with one another,  rather they offer to buy and sell currencies via [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) brokers. Operating through such brokers is advantageous because,  since they collect buy and sell quotations for most currencies from many banks,  the most favourable quotation is obtained quickly and at very low cost. One disadvantage of dealing through a broker is that a small brokerage fee is payable which is not incurred in a straight bank to bank deal. Each financial centre normally has just a handful of authorized brokers through which commercial banks conduct their exchanges.

Bulls and bears in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market

Speculators are usually classified as bulls or bears according to their view on a particular [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). If a speculator expects a [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md),  for example the pound (spot and forward),  to appreciate in the future they are said to be 'bullish' about the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). It pays the speculator to take a [long position](../Financial%20Engineering/Derivatives/Part%20I%20-%20Forwards%20and%20Futures/Chapter%204%20-%20Futures:%20Hedging%20and%20Speculation.md) on the pound,  that is,  to buy the pound spot or forward at a cheap price today in the hope that they can sell it at a higher price in the future. If a speculator expects the pound (spot and forward) to depreciate in the future he or she is said to be 'bearish' about the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). It will pay the speculator to take a short position on the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md),  that is,  to sell the pound at what they consider to be a relatively high price today in the hope of buying it back at a cheaper rate sometime in the future

Central banks. Normally the monetary authorities of a country are not indifferent to changes in the external value of their [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). Even though exchange rates of the major industrialized nations have been left to fluctuate freely since 1973,  central banks frequently intervene to buy and sell their currencies in a bid to influence the rate at which their [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) is traded. Under a fixed exchange rate system the authorities are obliged to purchase their currencies when there is excess supply,  and sell the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) when there is excess demand.

1.4 [ARBITRAGE](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) IN THE [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) MARKET

Financial centre [arbitrage](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) ensures that the dollar–pound exchange rate quoted in New York will be the same as that quoted in London and other financial centres. This is because if the exchange rate is$1.36/£1 in New York but only$1.34/£1 in London,  it would be profitable for banks to buy pounds in London and simultaneously sell them in New York and make a guaranteed 2 cents for every pound bought and sold. [The act](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/The%20Dodd%20Frank%20Act%20and%20Its%20Impact.md) of buying pounds in London will lead to a depreciation of the dollar in London,  while selling pounds in New York will lead to an appreciation of the dollar in New York. Such a process continues until the rate quoted in the two centres coincides at,  say,  $1.35/£1.

Cross [currency arbitrage](.md). To illustrate what is meant by [currency arbitrage](.md) let us suppose that the exchange rate of the dollar against the pound is$1.35/£1 and the exchange rate of the dollar against the euro is$1.2175/€1. [Currency arbitrage](.md) implies that the exchange rate of the euro against the pound will be €1.1088/£1 (1.35/1.2175 = 1.1088). If this were not the case,  say there was 1.25 euros per pound,  then a UK dealer wanting dollars would do better to first obtain 1.25 euros which would then buy$1.5219 making nonsense of a$1.35/£1 quotation. The increased demand for euros would quickly appreciate its rate against the pound to the €1.1088/£1 level. Table 1.3 shows a set of cross rates for the major currencies.

Some banks are keen to buy a [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) because they are short of it and others are keen to sell a [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) because they have too much of it. This means that banks will quote slightly different bid–offer quotes on a [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) in the interbank market. 

1.5 THE SPOT AND FORWARD EXCHANGE RATES

The [spot exchange rate](../Financial%20Instruments/Review%20Session%20Notes/Arbitrage%20Opportunity%20Accounting.md). This is the quotation between two currencies for immediate delivery. In other words,  the current exchange rate of two currencies vis-à-vis each other. In practice,  there is normally a two-day lag between a spot purchase or sale and the actual exchange of currencies to allow for verification,  paperwork and clearing of payments.

The [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md). In addition to the [spot exchange rate](../Financial%20Instruments/Review%20Session%20Notes/Arbitrage%20Opportunity%20Accounting.md) it is possible for economic agents to agree today to [exchange currencies](../Clippings/Currency%20Swap%20Basics.md) at some specified time in the future,  most commonly for one month (30 days),  three months (90 days),  six months (180 days),  nine months (270 days) and one year (360 days). The rate of exchange at which such a purchase or sale can be made is known as the [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md). Exactly why economic agents may engage in forward exchange transactions and how the [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) quotation is determined is a subject we shall look at later in this chapter.

[Nominal exchange rate](.md)

The exchange rate that prevails at a given date is known as the [nominal exchange rate](.md); it is the amount of US dollars that will be obtained for one pound in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market,  for example,  $1.35/£1. Similarly,  if the euro quotation is €1.1088/£1,  this is again a [nominal exchange rate](.md) quotation. The [nominal exchange rate](.md) is merely the price of one [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) in terms of another with no reference made to what this means in terms of purchasing power of goods/services. The [nominal exchange rate](.md) is usually presented in index form; if at the

base period the exchange rate is$1.35/£1 and one period later the exchange rate is$1.2150/£1,  the nominal index of the pound will change from the base period value of 100 to 90. A depreciation or appreciation of the [nominal exchange rate](.md) does not necessarily imply that the country has become more or less [competitive](Globalization/Chapter%203-Comparative%20Advantage,%20Competitiveness,%20and%20the%20Terms%20of%20Trade.md) on international markets; for such a measure we have to look at the real exchange rate.

Real exchange rate

The real exchange rate is the [nominal exchange rate](.md) adjusted for relative prices between the countries under consideration. It is normally expressed in index form algebraically as:

S=SP P*

where Sr is the index of the real exchange rate,  S is the [nominal exchange rate](.md) (foreign [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) units per unit of domestic [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md)) in index form,  P is the index of the domestic price level and P* is the index of the foreign price level. Table 1.4 illustrates the compilation of hypothetical nominal and real exchange rate indices for the pound,  and shows what exactly changes in the real exchange rate measure. In the first period the real exchange rate index is set equal to 100. A basket of UK goods priced at £100 will cost a US resident$135,    while a basket of US goods priced at$135 would cost a UK resident £100. Between period 1 and period 2 there is no change in the [nominal exchange rate](.md) which remains at$1.35/£1; however,    the UK price index rises while the US index remains the same. This means that there has been a real appreciation of the pound: UK goods now become relatively more expensive for US residents as they now have to use$162 to purchase the original bundle of UK goods which now cost £120; the bundle of US goods still costs$135 and a British citizen £100. This decreased British competitiveness is picked up by the real exchange rate appreciation of the pound from 100 to 120. Clearly,  since the [nominal exchange rate](.md) index has remained at 100,  it has failed to pick up the loss in UK competitiveness. In Table 1.4,  between periods 2 and 3,  UK prices remain unchanged while US prices increase; however,  the pound appreciates sufficiently that the UK gains no [competitive](Globalization/Chapter%203-Comparative%20Advantage,%20Competitiveness,%20and%20the%20Terms%20of%20Trade.md) advantage. Between periods 3 and 4,  UK prices rise and US prices fall but the [competitive](Globalization/Chapter%203-Comparative%20Advantage,%20Competitiveness,%20and%20the%20Terms%20of%20Trade.md) disadvantage to the UK is offset by a substantial depreciation of the pound,  so that there is a real depreciation of the pound,  meaning an improvement in UK competitiveness.

Table 1.4 Construction of nominal and real exchange rate indices of the pound

Period [Nominal exchange rate](.md) [Nominal exchange rate](.md) index of £ UK price index US price index Real exchange index of £ 1$1.35/£1 100 100 100 100 2$1.35/£1 100 120 100 120 3$1.62/£1 120 120 120 120 4$1.2150/£1 90 130 117 100 5$1.08/£1 80 150 125

Finally,  between periods 4 and 5,  although UK prices rise much more than US prices,  making the UK less [competitive](Globalization/Chapter%203-Comparative%20Advantage,%20Competitiveness,%20and%20the%20Terms%20of%20Trade.md),  this is offset by a large nominal depreciation of the pound and,  overall,  a real depreciation of the pound. From this example it is clear that the real exchange rate monitors changes in a country's price competitiveness. Real exchange rate indices unlike [nominal exchange rate](.md) indices are not publishable on a daily basis because the consumer price indices used are normally only published monthly

Effective exchange rate

Since most countries of the world do not conduct all their trade with a single foreign country,  policy-makers are not so much concerned with what is happening to their exchange rate against a single foreign [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) but rather what is happening to it against a basket of foreign currencies with which the country trades. The effective exchange rate is a measure of whether or not the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) is appreciating or depreciating against a weighted basket of foreign currencies. In order to illustrate how an effective exchange rate is compiled consider the hypothetical case of the UK conducting 30% of its foreign trade with the US and 70% of its trade with the Eurozone area. This means a weight of 0.3 will be attached to the bilateral exchange rate index with the dollar and 0.7 to the euro. Table 1.5 shows movements of a hypothetical effective exchange rate index for the pound. The US dollar has a 30% weight and the euro a 70% weight. Between periods 1 and 2 the pound remains the same against the dollar but depreciates 10% against the euro. As the euro has a greater weight than the dollar the effective exchange rate index indicates an overall depreciation of 7%. Period 3 leads to an appreciation against the US dollar and no change against the euro,  and the resulting appreciation of the effective exchange rate is consequently less marked than the appreciation against the dollar. In period 4,  the pound depreciates against both the dollar and euro and consequently there is a depreciation of the effective exchange rate. Finally,  in period 5 the pound depreciates against the US dollar and appreciates to a lesser extent against the euro; however,  the effective exchange rate depreciates only marginally because more weight is attached to the appreciation against the euro than to the depreciation against the dollar the nominal effective exchange rate is easy to compile on a daily basis and normally provides a reasonable measure of changes in a country's [competitive](Globalization/Chapter%203-Comparative%20Advantage,%20Competitiveness,%20and%20the%20Terms%20of%20Trade.md) position for periods of several months,  it does not take account of the effect of price movements. In order to get a better idea of changes in a country's [competitive](Globalization/Chapter%203-Comparative%20Advantage,%20Competitiveness,%20and%20the%20Terms%20of%20Trade.md) position over time we would need to compile a real effective exchange rate index. For this,  we would first of all compile the real exchange rate index against each of the trading partners' currencies,  and then use the same procedure as for compiling the nominal effective exchange rate index. Table 1.6 shows the nominal effective exchange rate indices for the major industrialized countries since 1980,  while Table 1.7 shows the real effective exchange rate indices for the major industrialized countries using consumer price indices for calculation purposes. Table 1.5 Construction of a nominal effective exchange rate index of the pound Period [Nominal exchange rate](.md) index of$/£ [Nominal exchange rate](.md) index of €/£ Effective exchange rate index of £ 1 100 100 100 2 100 90 93 3 120 90 99 4 90 80 83

5 80 85 83.5

Note: The effective exchange rate index of the pound is constructed by multiplying the$/£ index by 0.3 and the €/£ index by 0.7 and adding the resulting two figures.

The demand for [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md)

The demand for pounds in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market is a derived demand; that is,  the pounds are not demanded because they have an intrinsic value in themselves,  but rather because of what they can buy. Table 1.8 shows the derivation of a hypothetical demand for pounds schedule with respect to changes in the exchange rate. As the pound appreciates against the dollar,  that is,  moves from$1.20/£1 towards$1.50/£1,  the price of the UK export to US importers increases,  which leads to a lower quantity of exports and with it a reduced demand for pounds. Hence,  the demand curve (D) for pounds which is depicted in Figure 1.4 slopes down from left to right. In this simple model,  the demand for pounds depends upon the demand for UK exports. Any factor which results in an increase in the demand for UK exports,  that is,  column 4 in Table 1.8,  will result in an increased demand for pounds and a shift to the right of the demand curve for pounds. Among factors that result in a rightward shift of the demand schedule for pounds are a rise in US income,  a change in US tastes in favour of UK goods and a rise in the price of US goods. All these factors would result in an increased demand for UK exports and hence pounds. The effect of an increase in the demand for pounds is to shift the demand schedule to the right.

The supply of [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) which are purchased by increasing the amount of pounds supplied in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market,  and this yields an upward-sloping supply of pounds (Figure 1.5). 

1.8 ALTERNATIVE EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES

At the Bretton Woods conference of 1948 the major nations of the Western world agreed to a pegged exchange rate system,  each country fixing its exchange rate against the US dollar with a small margin of fluctuation around the par value. In 1973 the Bretton Woods system broke down and the major currencies were left to be determined by market forces in a floating exchange rate world.

Floating exchange rate regime

Under a floating exchange rate regime the authorities do not intervene to buy or sell their [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market. Rather,  they allow the value of their [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) to change due to fluctuations in the supply and demand of the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). In Figure 1.7(a) the exchange rate is initially determined by the interaction of the demand (D1) and supply (S1) of pounds at the exchange rate of$1.35/£1. There is an increase in the demand for UK exports which shifts the demand curve from D1 to D2,    and this increase in the demand for pounds leads to an appreciation of the pound from$1.35/£1 to$1.50/£1. Figure 1.7(b) examines the impact of an increase in the supply of pounds due to an increased demand for US exports and therefore dollars. The increased supply of pounds shifts the S1 schedule to the right to S2 resulting in a depreciation of the pound to$1.20/£1.

The essence of a floating exchange rate is that the exchange rate adjusts in response to changes in the supply and demand for a [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md)

Fixed exchange rate regime

For various reasons,  governments can intervene to try and fix the exchange rate around certain levels. For example,  an appreciation of the exchange rate might be considered undesirable as it would hit the economy's exports,  while a depreciation might be considered undesirable since it would lead to a rise in the cost of imports and endanger the central bank's [inflation target](Economic%20Stabilization%20Notes/Topics%20in%20Fiscal%20and%20Monetary%20Policies%20and%20Stabilization-%20Empirical%20Issues.md). Indeed,  many countries around the world continue to maintain fixed exchange rates against currencies such as the US dollar,  since it is perceived to be vital for economic stability. The Hong Kong dollar,  for instance,  has been pegged to the US dollar at HK$7.80/$1 since 1982. 

With non-sterilized intervention the buying/selling of sterling in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market affects the UK money supply and [interest rates](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md). Frequently,  however,  authorities will attempt to restore domestic money supply and [interest rates](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) back to their levels before the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market intervention took place,  and this is known as sterilized [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market intervention. As we shall see,  while nonsterilized intervention is likely to be effective in moving the exchange rate in the desired direction,  there is good reason to doubt that sterilized intervention can have much of an impact. In Figure 1.8(a) the exchange rate is assumed to be fixed by the authorities at the point where the demand schedule (D1) intersects the supply schedule (S1) at$1.35/£1. If there is an increase in the demand for pounds which shifts the demand schedule from D1 to D2,    there is a resulting pressure for the pound to appreciate. To avert an appreciation it is necessary for the Bank of England to sell Q1–Q2 of pounds in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market by purchasing US dollars,    these sterling sales shifting the supply of pounds from S1 to S2. Such an intervention weakens the pound exchange rate back to$1.35/£1,  increasing the [Bank of England](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Reflections%20On%20Modern%20Bank%20Runs%20a%20Case%20Study%20of%20Northern%20Rock.md)'s reserves of US dollars while increasing the amount of pounds in circulation from M1 to M2 and lowering UK interest rate,  as shown in Figure 1.8(b). The effect on the UK money market of the [Bank of England](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Reflections%20On%20Modern%20Bank%20Runs%20a%20Case%20Study%20of%20Northern%20Rock.md) selling pounds in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market is to increase the UK money supply from M1 to M2 and consequently lower the UK short-term rate of interest from r1 to r2 in Figure 1.8(b). Since the sale of pounds has increased the UK money supply the intervention is of the non-sterilized type. Such an intervention is likely to be very effective in weakening the pound from$1.50/£1 because it increases the amount of sterling in circulation and lowers the UK interest rate,  both of which will reinforce the effects of selling pounds in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market in weakening the pound to the desired level. Non-sterilized intervention of this type that directly affects the money supply and shortterm interest rate is very effective in moving the exchange rate in the desired direction. The [Bank of England](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Reflections%20On%20Modern%20Bank%20Runs%20a%20Case%20Study%20of%20Northern%20Rock.md) could just do as above and allow the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market intervention to increase the UK money supply and lower the UK interest,  but this would risk overshooting the Bank's [inflation target](Economic%20Stabilization%20Notes/Topics%20in%20Fiscal%20and%20Monetary%20Policies%20and%20Stabilization-%20Empirical%20Issues.md). In such circumstances,  the Bank might try to sterilize the effects of the increased money supply by selling UK Treasury bills to the public in an open-market operation that would reduce the money supply in Figure 1.8(b) from M2 back to the original level M1

However,  the Treasury bill sales would reduce the price of Treasury bills

and raise the UK interest rate from r2 back to r1. The reduction in the amount of pounds and the rise in [interest rates](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) resulting from the sterilization policy would then tend to increase the attractiveness of pounds in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market and start shifting the demand for sterling (D2) to the right such that the pound would head back towards$1.50/£1,  as the UK money supply and [interest rates](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) return to their levels M1 and r1 prior to the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market intervention. As such,  it is highly unlikely that a sterilized [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market intervention would be effective in achieving the weaker pound desired by the [Bank of England](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Reflections%20On%20Modern%20Bank%20Runs%20a%20Case%20Study%20of%20Northern%20Rock.md). This begs the question as to why the central bank would wish to sterilize their [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market interventions,  as this would undermine its ability to achieve the desired exchange rate. Part of the answer is that the central bank may hope to have a psychological impact on market participants whilst sticking to its monetary and interest rate targets. The fact that the [Bank of England](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Reflections%20On%20Modern%20Bank%20Runs%20a%20Case%20Study%20of%20Northern%20Rock.md) has been selling pounds in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market,  even though sterilized,  might reduce the demand for pounds in the market in the very short run. Having said this,  most traders will tend to discount [central bank intervention](Bridgewater/How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke/How%20Countries%20Go%20Broke-Chapter%206%20&%20Chapter%207.md) unless they see it is of the non-sterilized type leading to changes in money-market [interest rates](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md).

its [inflation target](Economic%20Stabilization%20Notes/Topics%20in%20Fiscal%20and%20Monetary%20Policies%20and%20Stabilization-%20Empirical%20Issues.md),  possibly leading to an unwanted slowdown in the UK economy. In such circumstances the Bank might try to sterilize the effects of the dec$r^1$ased money supply by buying UK Treasury bills from the public in an open-market operation,  raising the money supply in Figure 1.9(b) from M2 back to the original level M1. The problem with doing this,  however,  is that the Treasury bill purchases will raise the price of Treas$r^1$y bills and thereby lower the UK interest rate from r2 back to$r^1$. The increase in the amount of pounds and [the fall](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Fall%20of%20Bear%20Stearns%20Lost%20Opportunities%20Haunt%20Final%20Days%20of%20Bear%20Stearns;%20Executives%20Bickeredover%20Raising%20Cash%20Cutting%20Mortgages.md) in [interest rates](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) resulting from the sterilization policy would then tend to decrease the attractiveness of pounds in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market and therefore induce further selling pressure which,  by shifting the supply from S2 further to the right,  would mean that the pound would tend to go back towards$1.20/£1,    as the UK money supply and interest rates return to their levels M1 and$r^1$prior to the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market intervention. Again,  it is highly unlikely that a sterilized [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market intervention would be effective in achieving the stronger pound desired by the [Bank of England](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%207-%20CP,%20Repo,%20and%20the%20Crisis/Reflections%20On%20Modern%20Bank%20Runs%20a%20Case%20Study%20of%20Northern%20Rock.md). The lesson of this section is clear. If the authorities want to influence the exchange rate then the most effective type of [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market intervention would be of the non-sterilized type because such intervention leads to changes in the money supply and [interest rates](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) that reinforce the impact of the intervention. If the authorities decide to sterilize the impact of their interventions on the money supply,  through offsetting openmarket operations that move the money supply and [interest rates](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) back to the levels prior to the intervention,  then they will most likely have only a limited exchange rate impact since none of the [fundamentals](../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Lecture%20Notes%20Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Week%202/Week%202%20Fundamentals%20Of%20Forecasting.md) change.

Box 1.3 The [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) rate policy of the [People's Bank of China]([[People's%20Bank%20of%20China%20(PBoC)) (PBoC)|[People's Bank of China](China%20Foreign%20Exchange%20Reserves/People's%20Bank%20of%20China%20(PBoC).md)]]

The [People's Bank of China]([[People's%20Bank%20of%20China%20(PBoC)) (PBoC)|[People's Bank of China](China%20Foreign%20Exchange%20Reserves/People's%20Bank%20of%20China%20(PBoC).md)]] (PBOC) is the central bank of the People's Republic of China. Since the mid1990s the Chinese economy has been growing very rapidly. Economic growth has in large part been fuelled by a rapid increase in exports and high levels of [investment](../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md). In 1995 exports were around 20% of GDP but by 2011 they were 40%. For many years the Chinese authorities pegged the renminbi exchange rate at RMB 8.25/$1. Since$r^1$here was a massive demand to buy renminbi to buy Chinese exports and a high demand by foreign companies to undertake foreign direct investment in China the PBOC had to sell renminbi to buy US dollars to maintain the peg. It was only on 22 July 2005 under pressure from the United States with a huge [current account](Globalization/Chapter%2014-%20Capital%20Flows%20and%20the%20Current%20Account.md) deficit of$750 billion that the Chinese changed their [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) policy such that the renminbi would be pegged to a basket of five currencies,  enabling a gradual appreciation to occur over time against the US dollar. Following the adoption of the new [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) policy,  the PBOC continued to sell renminbi and buy dollars to prevent the renminbi appreciating too rapidly. The [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) intervention of the PBOC was by and large of the nonsterilized type,  resulting in a rapid growth of the Chinese money supply and [low interest rates](../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Articles/The%20Economist%20Time%20Is%20Cheap.md) which stimulated a property and [stock market](../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20III%20THE%20PLAYERS/Chapter%2012%20-%20Hedge%20Fund%20Strategies/Hedge%20Fund%20Strategies.md) boom. In addition,  there was an unprecedented rise in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) reserves of the PBOC which rose from$165 billion in 2000 to a peak of$3,  843 billion by 2014,  easily the largest [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) reserves of any country in the world. The reserve increases suggest that the PBOC had been buying the equivalent of approximately$263 billion a year up till 2014 since the turn of the century. In Figure 1.10(a),    we have the renminbi–dollar exchange rate starting at RMB 8.25/$1. There is heavy selling of dollars to buy renminbi represented by a shift to the right of the supply curve for dollars from S1 to S2. Left to a free market the exchange rate would change from RMB 8.25/$1 to,    say,    RMB 5/$$1. However,    the PBOC buys dollars (Q2 Q3) through its [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) interventions,    shifting the demand curve for dollars from D1 to D2. The effect of the intervention is that the appreciation of the renminbi is limited to only RMB 6.2/$$rather than the RMB 5/$1 that would occur in a free market.

Figure 1.10(b) depicts the rise in the Chinese money supply from M1 to M2 as a result of the sales of the renminbi to purchase US dollars along with an accompanying fall in the [short-term interest rate](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%209/The%20Gauss%20Model.md). Table 1.10 shows the rapid rise in the Chinese [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) reserves over the period 1995 to end 2020. The Chinese invested the dollars they bought in the [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) market into foreign [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) bonds,  such as [US Treasuries](../Credit%20Markets/Credit%20Market%20PSETS/Credit%20Market%20Homework%201.md) and euro denominated Treasury bonds,  and some in sterling and yen denominated bonds. Without the Chinese purchases of [US Treasuries](../Credit%20Markets/Credit%20Market%20PSETS/Credit%20Market%20Homework%201.md) over this period,  the US government would have struggled to finance its large fiscal deficits at relatively low yields. As the level of [Foreign Exchange](Foreign%20Exchange%20Quoting%20Conventions.md) reserves has increased,  the Chinese authorities have become increasingly concerned about the fact that approximately 65% of its reserves were in US dollars,  making it vulnerable to a large depreciation of the dollar. In response to these concerns,  in September 2007 the Chinese set up a

Sovereign Wealth Fund called the China [Investment](../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) Corporation with an initial endowment of$200 billion to invest in alternatives to US Treasury bonds such as foreign companies,    commodities and other overseas investments; by 2020 it was managing assets valued at$1,  045 billion.

### 1.9 THE DETERMINATION OF THE FORWARD EXCHANGE RATE

The forward exchange market is where buyers and sellers agree to [exchange currencies](../Clippings/Currency%20Swap%20Basics.md) at some specified date in the future.

Hedgers

Hedgers are agents (usually firms) that enter the forward exchange market to protect themselves against exchange rate fluctuations which entail [exchange rate risk](../Financial%20Instruments/Assignments/PSET%203%20Financial%20Instruments.md). By 'exchange risk' we mean the risk of loss due to adverse exchange rate movements. To illustrate why a firm may engage in a [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) transaction,  consider the example of a UK importer who is due to pay for goods from the USA to the value of$13,   000 in one year's time. Let us suppose that the spot exchange rate is$1.35/£1 while the one-year [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) is$1.30/£1. By buying dollars forward at this rate the trader can be sure that he only has to pay £10,  000.

by engaging in a forward exchange contract the trader can be sure of the amount of sterling he will have to pay for the imports,  and as such he can protect himself against the risk entailed by exchange rate fluctuations. It may be asked why the importer does not immediately buy US$13,   000 spot at$1.35/£1 for £9,  630 and hold the dollars for one year One reason is that he may not at present have the necessary funds for such a spot purchase and is reluctant to borrow the money,  knowing that he will have the funds in one year's time because of money from sales of goods. By engaging in a [forward contract](../Clippings/Forward%20Points%20in%20Currency.md) he can be sure of getting the dollars he requires at a known exchange rate,  even if he does not yet have the necessary sterling. Another reason is that such an argument ignores the interest rate differential: the pound is at a forward discount because the UK interest rate is greater than the US interest rate,  as will be seen when looking at the [covered interest rate parity](../Financial%20Instruments/Financial%20Instruments%20PSET%20Solutions.md) condition. In effect,  hedgers avoid exchange risk by matching their assets and liabilities in the foreign [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md). In the above example,  the UK importer buys$13,   000 forward (his asset) and will have to pay$13,  000 for the imported goods (his liability).

Arbitrageurs

Arbitrageurs are agents (usually banks) that aim to make a riskless profit out of discrepancies between [interest rate differentials](../Financial%20Markets/Random%20Walks%20in%20Fixed%20Income%20and%20Foreign%20Exchange/Chapter%201/What%20Really%20Is%20the%20Cross-Currency%20Basis.md) and what is known as the forward discount or forward premium. A [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) is said to be at a forward premium if the [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) quotation for that [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) represents an appreciation for that [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) compared to the spot quotation; whereas a [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) is said to be at a forward discount if the [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) quotation for that [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) represents a depreciation for that [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) compared to the spot quotation. The forward discount or premium is usually expressed as a percentage of the [spot exchange rate](../Financial%20Instruments/Review%20Session%20Notes/Arbitrage%20Opportunity%20Accounting.md); that is:

Forward discount / premium F  S S u100

where F is the [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) quotation and S is the [spot exchange rate](../Financial%20Instruments/Review%20Session%20Notes/Arbitrage%20Opportunity%20Accounting.md) quotation. The presence of arbitrageurs ensures that what is known as the [covered interest parity](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Interest%20Rates,%20Carry%20Trades,%20and%20Exchange%20Rate%20Movements.md) (CIP) condition holds continually – this is the formula used by banks to calculate their forward exchange quotation and is given by: F (r*r S S 1 r

where F is the one-year [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) quotation in foreign [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) per unit of domestic [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md),  S is the [spot exchange rate](../Financial%20Instruments/Review%20Session%20Notes/Arbitrage%20Opportunity%20Accounting.md) quotation in foreign [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) per unit of domestic [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md),  r is the one-year domestic interest rate and r* is the one-year foreign interest rate.

Suppose that the one-year dollar interest rate is 2%,  the sterling interest rate is 6% and the [spot rate](.md) of the dollar against the pound is$1.35/£1. Then the one-year [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) of the pound is:

F 0.020.06 1.35 1.35$1.2991/£1 1.06

Since 1.29911.35u100 3.77% 1.35

The one-year [forward rate](../Clippings/Forward%20Points%20in%20Currency.md) of sterling is at an annual forward discount of 3.77% To understand why CIP must be used to calculate the [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) consider what would happen if the [forward rate](../Clippings/Forward%20Points%20in%20Currency.md) was different to that calculated in the example; say it was$1.25/£1. In this instance,    a UK investor with £100 could earn the UK interest rate and at the end of the year have £106,    but by selling pounds spot (at$1.35/£1) and simultaneously buying pounds forward (at$1.25/£1) he would have$135,  earning the US interest rate of 2% giving him$137.70 ($135×1.02) at the end of one year,  which he would sell at a [forward price](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%2011/Forward%20Contracts%20and%20Forward%20Prices.md) of$1.25/£1,    giving £110.16. Clearly,    it pays a UK investor to sell pounds spot and buy pounds forward. In fact,    it would pay to borrow £100 knowing that he would have to pay back £106 but would make £110.16 by buying the dollars spot and selling dollars forward. With a sufficient number of investors doing this,    the forward rate of the pound would appreciate until such arbitrage possibilities were eliminated. With a spot rate of$1.35/£1,  only if the [forward rate](../Clippings/Forward%20Points%20in%20Currency.md) is at$1.2991/£1 will the guaranteed yields in US and UK time deposits be identical,    since$137.70 divided by$1.2991/£1 equals £106. Only at this [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) are there no [riskless arbitrage](../Financial%20Markets/Financial%20Trading%20and%20Markets/Chapter%208%20Arbitrage%20and%20Hedging%20With%20Fixed%20Income%20Instruments%20and%20Currencies.md) profits to be made.

This approximate version of CIP says that if the domestic interest rate is higher than the foreign interest rate,  then the domestic [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) will be at a forward discount by an equivalent percentage on an annualized basis; while if the domestic interest rate is lower than the foreign interest rate the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) will be at a forward premium by an equivalent percentage on an annualized basis In our example,  the US interest rate of 2% less the UK interest rate of 6% indicates an annual forward discount on the pound of 4%,  which is an approximation to the actual 3.77% discount obtained using the full CIP formula.

Speculators

Speculators are agents that hope to make a profit by accepting [exchange rate risk](../Financial%20Instruments/Assignments/PSET%203%20Financial%20Instruments.md). Speculators engage in the forward exchange market because they believe that the future [spot rate](.md) corresponding to the date of the quoted [forward exchange rate](../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Currency%20Derivatives.md) will be different to the quoted [forward rate](../Clippings/Forward%20Points%20in%20Currency.md).

Speculators are at work in both the spot and forward exchange markets. If they decide that the current [spot rate](.md) is overvalued they may sell spot so that the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) depreciates; if [interest rates](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) do not change then both the spot and forward exchange rates depreciate. Similarly,  if speculators feel that the [currency](../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md) is overvalued forward then they will sell forward and both the forward and spot exchange quotations will depreciate. Hence,  [arbitrage](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) ties the spot and forward exchange market quotations together via the CIP condition. Speculation and [hedging](../Financial%20Markets/Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%205/Key%20Rates%20O1s%20Durations%20and%20Hedging.md) may be thought of as determining the level of the spot and forward exchange quotations.

1.11 CONCLUSIONS

The need for a [foreign exchange market](Foreign%20Exchange%20Markets%20and%20Exchange%20Rate%20Determination.md) arises because [international trade](Globalization/Chapter%202-The%20Principle%20Of%20Comparative%20Advantage.md) in goods/services and financial assets almost always involves the exchange of differing national currencies.