# The Future  

“It is always wise to look ahead, but difficult to look further than you can see.”  

# GLOSSARY OF TERMS  

Conglomerate Discount The amount by which the price of a conglomerate trades at is lower than the sum of the prices at which its individual divisions would trade as stand-alone businesses.   
Internal Capital Markets The availability of funds from within the firm to finance investments, thereby reducing dependence on external financing.   
SIFI Systemically important financial institution. This refers to institutions whose failure is expected to have systemic consequences for th economy.  

OTC Over The Counter.  

# INTRODUCTION  

Your intellectual curiosity and patience are rewarded. The closing chapter, one of conjecture and surmise, is at hand. Though predictions about the future of [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) maybe unavoidable, they are also often fraught with drama. With provocative titles like, “The Banks of Tomorrow: Think Google and Facebook”1 or “Banks Need to Take on Amazon and Google or Die,”2 scribblers raise the specter of existential threats. Overlooked is the possibility that banks of the future may look neither like Google and Facebook nor like contemporary banks. New kinds of intermediaries may emerge with the capability to eclipse existing banks as well as extant social media paragons.  

In this chapter, we begin with a discussion of the main drivers for change in the [financial services](../../Course%20Notes/HBR%20Notes/HBR%20Case%20Study-%20Oaktree.md) industry. Three are especially compelling: governmental intervention/regulation, information technology, and customer preferences. As discussed in previous chapters, government regulation is ever-present in reshaping [financial markets](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) and institutions. Technology, however, may be even more powerful in driving change. It is indispensable for the deepening of [financial markets](../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md), the emergence of new distribution channels, and for financial innovations, including those in payments systems. It may encourage disintermediation and disaggregation of the value chain. For example, specialized payments providers may emerge, and internet-based platforms may allow for open-source [financial services](../../Course%20Notes/HBR%20Notes/HBR%20Case%20Study-%20Oaktree.md) like peer-to-peer (P-2-P) lending bypassing intermediaries. Changes in customer preferences play a key role as well. In part, technology is changing social attitudes and customer preferences. Witness how the development of hand-held mobile devices like smartphones has transformed consumer purchase and payment practices. How will banks and other intermediaries in the value chain respond to these developments, and what future scenarios are likely to be generated?  

While changes in customer preferences and payments technology may most directly affect retail [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md), we will argue that major developments can be expected in corporate and [investment banking](../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes%209-%20Corporate%20Securities%20And%20Credit%20Derivatives.md) as well.  

# CHANGE DRIVERS  

Public regulation, technology, and customer preferences are perhaps most disruptive and can be seen as the primary forces of change. Chapters 15 and 16 explained how the [Great Recession](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) led to a major expansion of regulation. This trend toward more intrusive governmental regulation is likely to continue with structural implications for the [banking](../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Problem%20Sets/HKS%20The%20Banking%20Industry.md) industry. Information technology is reshaping the [financial services](../../Course%20Notes/HBR%20Notes/HBR%20Case%20Study-%20Oaktree.md) industry too. Shifts from credit and debit cards to mobile and digital means of payment are already in evidence. Social media and the internet create new challenges for extant business models as they reduce the cost of information and encourage its dissemination in unpredictable ways. Technology disaggregates the value chain and introduces new players, processes, and products. As this happens, new externalities and risks are likely  