---
tags:
  - agency_mbs
  - fha
  - fhlmc
  - financial_crisis
  - fnma
  - gnma
  - gse
  - mbs
  - mortgage_market
  - us_government
aliases:
  - Agency MBS
  - GSEs
  - Mortgage Lending
  - US Mortgage Market
key_concepts:
  - Agency MBS, GSEs
  - FHA, FNMA, VA
  - MBS securitization
  - Mortgage market in US
  - Secondary mortgage market
---

# 15.1 THE MORTGAGE MARKET IN THE UNITED STATES  

Historically, banks dominated [mortgage lending](.md). They had existing relationships with potential borrowers (i.e., depositors, business owners) and their deposit base provided a relatively stable source of funds for making and holding mortgage loans. Since the [Great Depression](../../../International%20Finance/Bridgewater/Chapters/US%20Debt%20Crisis%20and%20Adjustment%201928-1937.md), however, US government policy has cultivated a [secondary market](../../Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20I%20RELATIVE%20VALUE%20BUILDING%20BLOCKS/Chapter%201%20-%20Purpose%20and%20Structure%20of%20Financial%20Markets/Primary%20Issuance%20and%20Secondary%20Resale%20Markets.md) in mortgages. The 1930s saw the creation of the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Federal National Mortgage Administration, or Fannie Mae (FNMA). The FHA was created to insure lenders - for a fee -- against the loss of principal or interest on approved mortgages, and FNMA was created to trade and hold FHA-insured loans. The Veterans Administration (VA) was created in the 1940s to offer veterans federally insured mortgages, which were added to FNMA's remit. The Government National Mortgage Association - Ginnie Mae (GNMA) - and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation - Freddie Mac (FHLMC) - were created in 1968 and 1970, respectively. GNMA's mission is to package FHA-, VA-, and other government-insured mortgages into MBS; to collect fees to insure those MBS; and to sell those MBS to investors. FHLMC's original purpose was to create, insure, and sell MBS from mortgages purchased from savings and loan associations.1  

In their simplest form, MBS are large portfolios or pools of individual mortgages that pass through payments of [interest and principal](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Notes%20on%20Currency%20Swaps.md) from borrowers to investors. There were several ideas behind the [securitization](../../../Financial%20Engineering/10.%20Other%20Topics%20in%20Quantitative%20Finance.md) of mortgages through MBS. First, enabling lenders to sell their mortgage loans facilitates the movement of [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) funds from where they are to where they are needed. Second, a large and diversified pool of mortgages trades with much greater [liquidity](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md) than would individual mortgages. Third, the guarantees described in the previous paragraph significantly increase the attractiveness of mortgages, because investors do not have to research the creditworthiness of individual homeowners nor bear that [credit risk](../../../Course%20Notes/Quantitative%20Trading%20Strategies%20Lecture%20Notes.md). Fourth, government can use its role in insurance and [securitization](../../../Financial%20Engineering/10.%20Other%20Topics%20in%20Quantitative%20Finance.md) to direct mortgage capital according to various policy goals, like affordable housing.  

In the decades preceding the [financial crisis](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md) of 2007-2009, FNMA and FHLMC were transformed into government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs): they became privately owned, publicly traded corporations, but were heavily regulated, received many benefits from their quasi-government status, and were required to pursue various public policy objectives. They had two business lines: the guarantee business, which made money by charging fees to. package and insure MBS; and the [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) business, which made money by borrowing in public debt markets at relatively low rates - available because of their quasi-government status - and investing in mortgages and MBS.  

GNMA, FHLMC, and FNMA are collectively called "the agencies," and their MBS are all called "[agency MBS](.md)," even though GNMA is the only one of the three that is actually a government agency and explicitly backed by the "full faith and credit"' of the federal government. In any case, from. about 2000 to the [financial crisis](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md) of 2007-2009, private banks, [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) banks, and other [mortgage lenders](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing/Fixed%20Income%20Lecture%20Notes/Teaching%20Note%206%20Mortgage%20Backed%20Securities.md) dramatically increased their issuance of non-agency or private-label MBS, particularly to pool together mortgages that were larger or less creditworthy than those acceptable for [agency MBS](.md). In fact, just before the crisis, non-[agency MBS](.md) issuance exceeded agency issuance.  

During the [financial crisis](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%209-%20Bailouts%20and%20Bank%20Failures/Squam%20Lake%20Group%20Letter.md) of 2007-2009, housing prices collapsed and many homeowners defaulted on their mortgages. Private-label MBs, which held particularly low-quality mortgages, suffered devastating losses, but the GSEs suffered as well. With losses on their guarantee and [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) businesses threatening their viability, they were rescued by the US Treasury and put into conservatorship, in which state they remain to this day. Before the crisis, claims on the GSEs were not legally backed by government, but it was widely believed - and market prices reflected -- that, in a crisis, the government would back those claims. And that belief was fulfilled: no holder of GSE debt or MBS lost principal or interest in the crisis.2 In this sense, the situation today is as it was before the crisis: even in conservatorship, GSE claims are not explicitly backed by the government but, should the need arise, markets expect these claims to be honored by the government.  

Under conservatorship, the GSEs have continued to grow in overall size, but have been subject to a number of policy changes. First, their [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) businesses are limited in size and scope to the facilitation of their guarantee businesses. Second, they offload some of their [credit risk](../../../Course%20Notes/Quantitative%20Trading%20Strategies%20Lecture%20Notes.md) to the private sector through the sale of [credit risk transfer](../../../Financial%20Engineering/A%20Primer%20on%20Structured%20Finance.md) securities, which are the subject of the last section of this chapter. Third, to increase [liquidity](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/III.%20Liquidity%20of%20Assets/Class%205-%20Private%20Information,%20Liquidity,%20and%20Securitization/Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Class%20Note%2010%20Liquidity%20and%20Liquidity%20Managementliquidity%20management.md), they are directed to keep their MBS similar enough to be fungible. In particular, since June 2019, MBS forward contracts, namely, TBAs, are written on uniform MBS (UMBS), which designation allows for the delivery of both FHLMC and FNMA MBS. Fourth, and most recently, provisions have been made for the GSEs to build capital in preparation for an exit from conservatorship. There are no plans in place, however, for actually effecting such an exit.  

TABLE 15.1 First-Lien Mortgages, Gross Issuance, in $\$1$ Trillions.   


<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">2020</td><td colspan="2">Q1-Q3 2021</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Issuance</td><td>%</td><td>Issuance</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>GSEMBS</td><td>2.390</td><td>59.2</td><td>2.06</td><td>55.5</td></tr><tr><td>GNMAMBS</td><td>0.742</td><td>18.4</td><td>0.57</td><td>15.4</td></tr><tr><td>BankPortfolio</td><td>0.869</td><td>21.5</td><td>1.02</td><td>27.5</td></tr><tr><td>Private-LabelMBS</td><td>0.038</td><td>0.9</td><td>0.06</td><td>1.6</td></tr></table></body></html>

Source: Ginnie Mae (2021), "Global Markets Analysis Report," various months.  

This brief history sets the stage for describing the [US mortgage market](.md) as it stands today. Tables 15.1 and 15.2 show the extent to which [agency MBS](.md) dominate the US residential mortgage market. Table 15.1 reports the gross issuance of first-lien mortgages in 2020 and in the first three quarters of 2021.3 Starting with 2021, $70.9\%$ of new mortgages are sold through agency  

TABLE 15.2  Residential Mortgages Outstanding (1-4 Family), as of September 2021, in $\$1$ Trillions.   


<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Outstanding</td><td>%</td><td></td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>[Agency MBS](.md)</td><td>8.18</td><td>66.7</td><td>FNMA</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>FHLMC</td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td>Unsecuritized 1stLien</td><td>3.30</td><td>26.9</td><td>GNMA</td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td>Private-Label MBS</td><td>0.39</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Home Equity Loans (2nd Lien)</td><td>0.40</td><td>3.2</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>12.27</td><td>3.3 100.0</td><td></td><td>100</td></tr></table></body></html>

Sources: Federal Reserve Board, Financial Accounts of the United States; and Ginnie Mae (2021), "Global Markets Analysis Report," December 2021.  

MBS; $27.5\%$ are made and held by banks; and only $1.6\%$ are sold through private-label MBS. The dominance of [agency MBS](.md) was even greater in 2020, perhaps due to the pandemic and economic shutdowns, during which time private credit conditions were strained. Table 15.2 shows the prevalence of [agency MBS](.md) with respect to amounts outstanding. About $67\%$ of mortgages are held in [agency MBS](.md), and only $3.2\%$ in private-label MBS. The rightmost columns of the table separate outstanding [agency MBS](.md) volumes by agency.  

Because the agencies play such a large role in the mortgage market,. their underwriting criteria play an outsized role as well. Government-insured mortgages, like those made by the FHA and VA, are called government loans. All other loans are called conventional loans. Mortgages eligible to. be included in [agency MBS](.md) are called conforming mortgages, while those not eligible are called nonconforming. For the GSEs, for example, at the time of this writing, conforming mortgages must have a FICO score greater or equal to 620; an LTV less than $97\%$ ; a debt-to-income ratio (DTI) no greater than $45\%$ ; and, for most geographical areas, a loan amount less than $\$647,200$ 4 The requisite characteristics for FHA and VA mortgages are different. In any case, jumbo mortgages, which have loan amounts greater than the "conforming balance limit," along with mortgages of lower than conforming [credit quality](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%202-%20Debt%20Contracts%20due%20to%20Lack%20of%20Information/Wellman%20Inc%20the%20Importance%20of%20Loan%20Covenants.md), have to be funded outside the agency ecosystem.5. In addition, to the extent that the GSEs limit purchases of mortgages with certain characteristics, like those funding second homes or [investment](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) properties, private markets have the opportunity to satisfy the residual demand.  

Table 15.3 shows averages of selected characteristics of loans to. first-time homebuyers for the purposes of purchasing a home (rather than refinancing an existing mortgage). Loan characteristics do not vary much across FNMA and FHLMC, because, as mentioned before, their business models are converging. GNMA loans are smaller and, by standard metrics, less creditworthy, with significant variation across FHA, VA, and other government-guaranteed loans.  

Deposit franchises give banks competitive advantages in making and holding mortgage loans. These advantages are much less pronounced, however, for originating conforming mortgages, that is, for arranging mortgages with borrowers and then selling those mortgages into [agency MBs](.md). With the. increasing dominance of [agency MBs](.md), therefore, the market share of nonbank originators has steadily increased, from less than. $25\%$ in 2007 to more than $75\%$ toward the end of 2021.6 In fact, a rough calculation assuming a. $25\%$ bank share of [agency MBS](.md) originations, and mortgage gross issuance as described in Table 15.1, that is,. $71\%$ for [agency MBS](.md) and $27.5\%$ for bank loan portfolios, gives an overall bank participation in mortgage issuance of. $25\%$ times $71\%$ plus $27.5\%$ , or about $45\%$  

TABLE 15.3 Average Characteristics of First-Time Homebuyer Purchase Loans, as of December 2020.   


<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td colspan="3">WithinGNMAMBS</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>FNMA</td><td>FHLMC</td><td>GNMA</td><td>FHA</td><td>VA</td><td>Other</td></tr><tr><td>Loan Amount ($)</td><td>305,134</td><td>264,303</td><td>245,013</td><td>237,630</td><td>299,448</td><td>174,011</td></tr><tr><td>FICOScore</td><td>750.4</td><td>744.7</td><td>688.5</td><td>678.6</td><td>713.3</td><td>701.1</td></tr><tr><td>LTV (%)</td><td>87.7</td><td>88.0</td><td>96.8</td><td>95.5</td><td>99.6</td><td>99.4</td></tr><tr><td>DTI (%)</td><td>34.1</td><td>34.4</td><td>41.5</td><td>43.1</td><td>39.5</td><td>34.9</td></tr></table></body></html>

Source: Ginnie Mae (2021), "Global Markets Analysis Report," February.  

Nonbank origination channels are classified into three groups: retail,. broker, and correspondent. Retail originators contact borrowers directly. Broker originators provide various services to independent brokers who seek out and find potential borrowers. And correspondent originators buy loans from smaller banks and credit unions..  

This [market overview](../../Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20I%20RELATIVE%20VALUE%20BUILDING%20BLOCKS/Chapter%201%20-%20Purpose%20and%20Structure%20of%20Financial%20Markets/Overview%20of%20Financial%20Markets.md) concludes with mortgage servicers. Servicers. receive ongoing fees to administer mortgage loans; keep in touch with borrowers; pass payments from borrowers to investors; help borrowers through loan modifications or forbearance; and, in the case of missed payments, temporarily advance funds to investors. Lenders can either keep the servicing rights to a loan or sell the rights to another entity. Arguments. for keeping the rights include their performing as a hedge to an origination. business. First, servicing provides steady income through periods of slow. origination. Second, when refinancings decrease servicing income (by extinguishing existing mortgages), income from refinancing originations increases. Another reason originators keep servicing rights is to keep in touch with borrowers who may be contemplating refinancing. In that way,. lenders can recapture refinancing, that is, market their own refinancing. products with the goal of preventing borrowers from refinancing with a different originator.  