---
tags:
  - asset_allocation
  - asset_pricing
  - capital_budgeting
  - capital_structure
  - financial_markets
aliases:
  - CAPM
  - Modern Asset Pricing
key_concepts:
  - asset allocation
  - capital budgeting decisions
  - financial risk management
  - pricing financial assets
  - shareholders vs creditors
---

# 1.1 What is modern asset pricing?  

[Asset pricing models](../../../Financial%20Engineering/Financial%20Mathematics%20Course.md) are models for the [pricing](../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) of financial assets. It is interesting in itself to be able to model and understand the [pricing mechanisms](Chinese%20Financial%20System.md) in the seemingly complex [financial markets](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md), but it is also important for a number of financial problems faced by individuals and corporations such as  

[asset allocation](../../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%202-%20Asset%20Allocation%20with%20Multiple%20Risky%20Assets.md): how individual and [institutional investors](../../Financial%20Trading%20and%20Markets/Chapter%204%20Institutional%20Trading.md) combine various financial assets into portfolios;   
the measurement and management of financial risks, e.g. in banks and other financial insti-. tutions;   
[capital budgeting](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/I-%20Introduction%20to%20Financial%20Markets%20and%20Intermediation/I-%20Introduction%20to%20Financial%20Markets%20and%20Intermediation/Class%20Note%201-%20Borrower-Lender%20conflicts%20and%20implied%20agency%20problems.md) decision in firms;   
[capital structure](../../../Advanced%20Financial%20Analysis%20and%20Valuation/Introduction%20to%20Corporate%20Finance.md) decisions in firms;   
. the identification and possible resolution of potential [conflicts of interest](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/II.%20The%20Roles%20of%20Banks%20and%20Derivative%20Markets%20in%20Resolving%20Problems%20Inherent%20in%20Debt%20Contracts/Class%202-%20Debt%20Contracts%20due%20to%20Lack%20of%20Information/Wellman%20Inc%20the%20Importance%20of%20Loan%20Covenants.md) between the stakeholders of a firm, e.g. shareholders vs. creditors, shareholders vs. managers.  

To the extent that central banks and governments want to control or at least influence [financial markets](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md), e.g. setting [interest rates](../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%202/Interest%20Rate%20Quotations.md) or limiting [stock market](../../Financial%20Engineering%20and%20Arbitrage%20in%20the%20Financial%20Markets/PART%20III%20THE%20PLAYERS/Chapter%2012%20-%20Hedge%20Fund%20Strategies/Hedge%20Fund%20Strategies.md) volatility, they also need a deep. understanding of the [asset pricing](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing/Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing.md) mechanisms and the link between [financial markets](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) and macro-. economics. Finally, there is a trend in accounting regulation towards more market-oriented valuation of assets and liabilities instead of the traditional valuation at historical costs..  

Undoubtedly, the [Capital Asset Pricing Model](../../../Financial%20Engineering/2.%20Forwards,%20Swaps,%20Futures,%20and%20Options.md) (CAPM) developed by Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and Mossin (1966) is the best known [asset pricing](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing/Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing.md) model. The key message of the model is that the [expected excess return](../Chapter%209%20-%20Factor%20Models/Theoretical%20Factors.md) on a risky financial asset is given by the product of the market-beta of the asset and the [expected excess return](../Chapter%209%20-%20Factor%20Models/Theoretical%20Factors.md) on the market [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md). In symbols, the relation can be written as  
$$
\operatorname{E}[R_{i}]-R^{f}=\beta_{i}\left(\operatorname{E}[R_{M}]-R^{f}\right).
$$  

Here the "excess return' of an asset or a [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) is the return $R_{i}$ less the [risk-free return](../Chapter%204%20-%20State%20Prices/A%20Preview%20of%20Alternative%20Formulations.md) $R^{f}$ and the "market-beta' of an asset is the covariance between the return on this asset and the return on the market [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md), divided by the variance of the return on the market [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md), i.e. $\beta_{i}=\mathrm{Cov}[R_{i},R_{M}]/\mathrm{Var}[R_{M}]$ . Only the risk correlated with the market will give a risk premium in terms of a higher [expected return](../../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%201-%20Probability%20Distributions%20of%20Returns.md) (assuming the market-beta is positive). The remaining risk can be diversified away and is therefore not priced in equilibrium. In principle, the market [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) includes all assets, not only traded financial assets but also non-traded assets like the human capital (value of labor income) of all individuals. However, the market [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) is typically approximated by a broad [stock index](../../../Financial%20Instruments/Lecture%20Notes-%20Financial%20Instruments/Teaching%20Note%201-%20Forward%20Rates%20Agreement/Hedging%20Strategies%20with%20Forwards.md), although this approximation is not necessarily very precise.  

The CAPM has been very successful as a pedagogical tool for presenting and quantifying the. tradeoff between risk and (expected) return, and it has also been widely used in practical applications. It captures some important characteristics of the [pricing](../../Fixed%20Income%20Securities%20Tools%20for%20Today's%20Markets/Chapter%207/Arbitrage%20Pricing%20of%20Derivatives.md) in [financial markets](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) in a rather simple way. However, the CAPM is insufficient in many aspects and it is based on a number of. unrealistic assumptions. Here is a partial list of problems with the CAPM:.  

1. The original CAPM is formulated and derived in a one-period world where assets and investors are only modeled over one common period. In applications, it is implicitly assumed that the CAPM repeats itself period by period which intuitively demands some sort of independence between the [pricing mechanisms](Chinese%20Financial%20System.md) in different periods, which again requires the unrealistic assumption that the [demand and supply](../../../International%20Finance/China%20Foreign%20Exchange%20Reserves/Currency%20Appreciation%20and%20Depreciation.md) of agents living for several periods are. the same in all periods..   
2. The CAPM is not designed for capturing variations in asset prices over time and cannot do SO.   
3. Typical derivations of the CAPM assume that all [asset returns](Some%20Stylized%20Empirical%20Facts%20About%20Asset%20Retur.md) over the fixed period are. normally distributed. For assets with limited liability you cannot loose more than you have invested so the rate of return cannot be lower than. $-100\%$ , which is inconsistent with the normal distribution that associates a positive probability to any return between. $-\infty$ and $+\infty$ . Empirical studies show that for many assets the normal distribution is not even a good approximation of the return distribution..   
4. The true market [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) contains many unobservable assets so how should you find the [expected return](../../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%201-%20Probability%20Distributions%20of%20Returns.md) and variance on the market [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) and its covariances with all individual assets?   
5. The CAPM is really quite unsuccessful in explaining empirical [asset returns](Some%20Stylized%20Empirical%20Facts%20About%20Asset%20Retur.md). Differences in market-betas cannot explain observed differences in average [returns](../Chapter%203%20-%20%20Assets,%20Portfolios,%20and%20Arbitrage/Assets.md) of stocks..   
6. The CAPM is not a full [asset pricing](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing/Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing.md) model in the sense that it does not say anything. about what the return on the [risk-free asset](../../../Financial%20Engineering/2.%20Forwards,%20Swaps,%20Futures,%20and%20Options.md) or the [expected return](../../../Advanced%20Investments/Lecture%201-%20Probability%20Distributions%20of%20Returns.md) on the market [portfolio](../../../Advanced%20Investments/An%20Asset%20Allocation%20Primer.md) should be. And it does not offer any insight into the links between [financial markets](../../../Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions/Financial%20Markets%20and%20Institutions%20Lecture%20Notes.md) and macroeconomic variables like consumption, production, and [inflation](../../../International%20Finance/Bridgewater/Principles%20For%20Navigating%20Big%20Debt%20Cycles/Part%20II%20Detailed%20Case%20Studies/German%20Debt%20Crisis%20andHyperinflation%20(1918–1924)/War%20Economies%20and%20Hyperinflation.md)..  

The purpose of this book is to develop a deeper understanding of [asset pricing](../../../Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing/Fixed%20Income%20Asset%20Pricing.md) than the CAPM can offer.  

When an investor purchases a given asset, she obtains the right to receive the future payments of the asset. For many assets the size of these future payments is uncertain at the time of purchase since it may depend on the overall state of the economy and/or the state of the issuer of the asset at the payment dates. Risk-averse investors will value a payment of a given size more highly if they receive it in a "bad' state than in a "good" state. This is captured by the term "state price" introduced by Arrow (1953). A state price for a given state at a given future point in time indicates how much investors are willing to sacrifice today in return for an extra payment of one unit in that future state. Presumably investors will value a given payment in a given state the same no matter. which asset the payment comes from. Therefore state prices are valid for all assets. The value of any specific asset is determined by the general state prices in the market and the state-contingent future payments of the asset. [Modern asset pricing](.md) theory is based on models of the possible states and the associated state prices.  

The well-being of individuals will depend on their consumption of goods throughout their lives. By trading financial assets they can move consumption opportunities from one point in time to another and from one state of the world to another. The preferences for consumption of individuals determine their demand for various assets and thereby the equilibrium prices of these assets. Hence, the state price for any given state must be closely related to the individuals' (marginal) utility of consumption in that state. Many [modern asset pricing](.md) theories and models are based on this link between asset prices and consumption.  